This is Jocko podcast number one oh five with Echo Charles and me,
Jocko Willink.
Good Evening Echo.
Good evening
specialist.
Vieira was witness to scenes of horror.
The enemy was all over,
at least a couple of hundred of them walking around for three or four minutes.
It seemed like three or four hours.
Okay.
They were shooting in machine gunning are wounded and laughing and giggling.
Yeah.
I knew they'd kill me if they saw I was alive when they got near,
I played dead.
Okay.
I kept my eyes open and stared at a small tree.
I knew that dead men had their eyes open.
Okay.
Vieira continues.
Then one of the North Vietnamese came up,
looked at me,
then kicked me and I flopped over.
Yeah.
I guess he thought I was dead.
There was blood running out of my mouth,
my arm,
my legs.
Okay.
You took my watch and my 45 caliber pistol and walked on.
I watched them strip off all our weapons.
They left.
Then they left back where they came from.
I remember the artillery,
the bombs,
the napalm everywhere real close around me.
It shook the ground underneath me,
but it was coming in on the north Vietnamese soldiers too.
All this and more,
much more took place between 6:50 AM and 7:40 AM on November 15th,
1965 the agonies of Charlie company occurred over 140 yards of the line,
okay.
But men were fighting and dying on three sides of our thinly held American
perimeter
in the center.
I held the lives of all of these men in my hands.
Okay.
The badly wounded captain Bob Edwards was on the radio now asking for
reinforcements.
The only reserve I had was a reconnaissance platoon.
22 men was the attack on Charlie company,
the main enemy threat.
Okay.
Delta Company and the combined mortar position.
We're also under attack now,
reluctantly,
I told Captain Edwards that his company would have to fight on a loan for the
time being.
The Dean of the battle was unbelievable.
Rifles and machine guns and mortars and grenades rattled,
banged and boomed.
Okay.
Two batteries of 105 millimeter howitzers,
12 big guns located on another landing zone,
five miles distant.
We're firing nonstop,
their shells exploding no more than 50 yards outside the ring of shallow
foxholes beside me in the battalion command post,
the air force forward controller,
Lieutenant Charlie hustings 26 from Lamesa,
New Mexico radio to special code word broken Arrow,
meaning American unit in danger of being overrun and within a short period of
time,
every available fighter bomber in south Vietnam with stacked overhead at a
thousand foot intervals from 7,000 feet to 35,000 feet waiting,
it's turned to deliver bombs and napalm to the battlefield.
Okay.
Among my sergeants,
there were three war men,
men who parachuted into Normandy on d day and had survived the war in Korea.
In those old veterans were shocked by the savagery and hellish noise of this
battle.
Yeah.
Choking clouds of smoke and dust obscured the killing ground.
Yeah,
we were dry mouth and our bowels churned with fear and still the enemy came on
in waves.
Okay.
And that right there is from the opening chapter of the book.
We were soldiers once and young,
but general how more and Joe Galloway and the book,
which was turned into a movie,
which I saw when it came out in 2002 Mel Gibson,
it's a good movie for sure,
but it's also a Hollywood movie in Hollywood movies.
They're forced to fit
okay
into two hours and they got to follow some kind of a plot and they can't dig
into the details and I can't really give you a comprehensive understanding of
the events.
And I purposely did not watch this movie again while preparing for this podcast
or cause I didn't want it in there.
I didn't want it in my brain.
The movies,
interpretation of the characters in it and the way that they were portrayed.
And the book is so good.
Hmm.
It's so packed with detail and drama and action and
okay
and utterly incomprehensible heroism.
Yeah.
Everyone should read this book.
Everyone.
It starts off,
it explains the way the battle unfolded and it talks how it went tactically,
operationally and strategically goes through all those levels of warfare.
And you can see in the book how strategy unfolds.
At the tactical level and how tactical situations impact strategy as well.
You can see it on both sides.
And there's also,
which is interesting,
there's significant commentary from the Vietnamese enemy leadership that they
went back and interviewed after the war was,
which just makes it an incredible book.
And like I said,
everyone should read it.
So it tells the story of operations in the,
I drank valley in 1965 from November 14th until November 18th so five days.
Yeah.
But the fighting as was noted in that opening chapter is absolutely brutal.
Leadership is tested over and over and over again.
Okay.
And this battle took place with battalions and companies from the Seventh
Cavalry Regiment.
And if you remember the books we covered on General George Custer,
he was a officer that led seventh cavalry troops in the battle of little big
horn where he was surrounded and he was killed along with 267 of his soldiers,
all of them dead by the native American warriors on the Psu side from the Lakota
and the Dakota and the northern Cheyenne and the Arapaho tribes.
And Cavalry in those days meant horseback.
That's what I meant.
That's what mounted cavalry,
that's what it was.
And in 1965,
they adopted cavalry to a new kind of steed,
a new form of transport.
And this was the helicopter.
And in 1965 they converted the 11th Air Assault Test Division to the First
Cavalry Division.
And the first and second battalions of the First Cavalry Division soon took on
the historical name of general Custer's and unit.
And,
and by the way,
general cost of the seventh Cav,
even though that's kind of the most famous along with this,
I guess,
along with the,
I drank valley,
but they're,
they the seventh cabs served in World War II and Korea,
all kinds of incredible service there.
And a lot of that is covered in the book.
But again,
we'll have to move through this a little bit more quickly.
Otherwise,
go read the book,
which I highly recommend,
but let's get into it.
Uh,
starting about where Lieutenant Colonel Hal Moore takes over the first battalion
seventh cavalry.
Going back to the book on Monday,
June 29th as scheduled,
I took command of my battalion.
I was 42 years old,
a west point graduate of class of 1945 with 19 years commissioned service
including 14 month tour in Korea,
combat tour in Korea.
In a brief talk to the troops afterward,
I told him that this was a good battalion,
but it would get better.
I will do my best.
I said,
and I expect the same from each you
before taking command.
I had a long talk with the most important man in any battalion.
The sergeant major Bazell,
l Plumley 44 years old and six and a six foot two inch bear of a man hailed from
West Virginia.
The men sometimes called him old iron jaw,
but never in his hearing.
Plumley was a two warm man and war master parachute wings with his five combat
jumps stars.
He was what the young airborne types called a Ford jump bastard.
Plumley had survived all four combat jumps of the 82nd airborne division in
World War II,
Sicily and Salerno in 1943 the and then in 1944 d day at Normandy and market
garden in the Netherlands for that matter.
He also made one combat parachute jump in the Korean War with the hundred 87th
airborne infantry regimen.
He ended World War Two,
a buck sergeant and was promoted to sergeant major in 1961 so let's think about
that for a minute.
Let's think about that.
I mean,
we've talked,
we've definitely talked about Normandy.
We definitely talked about market garden.
He jumped into both those and jumped into Sisley and Salerno and jumped into
combat in the Korean War.
Unbelievable.
Going back to the book,
the Sergeant Major was a no bullshit guy who believed as I did in tough
training,
tough discipline and tough physical conditioning.
To this day,
there are veterans of the battalion who are convinced that God may look like
Sergeant Major Basil Plumley,
but he isn't nearly as tough as the sergeant major on sins,
small or large.
Privately.
I thanked my lucky stars that I had inherited such a treasure.
I told Sergeant Major Plumley that he had unrestricted access to me at any time
on any subject he wished to raise.
After the ceremony,
the company commanders and the battalion staff got to look at their new boss and
award on my standards.
They were fairly simple.
Only first place trophies will be displayed,
excepted or presented in this battalion.
Second place in our line of work,
his defeat of the unit on the battlefield and death for the individual and
combat.
No fat troops are officer's decision making will be decentralized.
Push the power down.
It pays off in wartime loyalty flows down as well.
I check up on everything.
I am available day or night to talk with any officer of this battalion.
Finally,
the sergeant major works for only for me and takes orders only for me.
He is my right hand man,
so he sat in the stage
pretty interesting.
Not only first place trophies,
second place,
no,
not happening here.
Back to the book.
The officer's of my new battalion were the usual great army mix of men who had
come from their jobs,
come to their jobs from west point ROTC officer candidate school and military
schools like the citadel.
Most of the young second lieutenants had come through ocs and college ROTC
programs.
There were three rifle companies in the battalion,
Alpha Bravo and Charlie companies.
Each at full strength supposed to have six officers in 164 enlisted men.
They were my maneuver elements.
Each rifle company had three rifle platoons plus one platoon of three 81
millimeter mortar squads for fire support.
Each rifle platoon in turn had three rifles,
squads plus a weapons squad of two m 60 machine guns for fire support.
So there's,
there's the breakdown right there may.
And they also had a,
another combat support company,
Delta Company,
which had a recon platoon,
a mortar platoon and an anti tank platoon.
And they converted the unneeded anti tank platoons in a machine gun platoon for,
for duty in Vietnam because there was no enemy tanks going up against.
So that's so that's what the battalion was looking like.
Going back to the book during the,
during those first 14 months from now,
he's going to talk about their work up a little bit,
how they got ready for combat back to the book.
During those 14 months before we sailed for Vietnam,
we spent most of the time in the field practicing assault landings from
helicopters and the incredibly complex coordination of artillery tactically or
support an aerial rocket artillery with the all important flow of helicopters
into an out of the battle zone.
Commanders had to to learn to see terrain differently,
to add a constant scan for landing zones,
which are called LZs and up zones pzs to all the other features they had to keep
in mind.
We practice rapid loading and unloading of men and materiel to reduce the
helicopters window of vulnerability.
Total flexibility was the watchword and planning and attitude.
There was one bit of sobering reality that I insisted be introduced at every
level in this training.
We would declare a platoon commander dead and Tate led his sergeant takeover and
carry out the mission or declare a sergeant dead and have one of his PFCs take
over running the squad.
We were training for war and leaders are killed in battle.
I wanted every man trained for and capable of taking over the job of the man
above him.
So their,
their work in a whole new gig here.
They'd never,
no one had really done this before.
Riding,
everyone's going into combat on helicopters and obviously helicopters give you
great amount of maneuverability.
You can be up vertically and take off and travel a great distance and sat down
anywhere or not anywhere,
just about anywhere.
You can sit down in a lot of places I should say,
cause you can't sit down anywhere,
especially in the jungle where you've got trees and all kinds of obstacles and
then you've enemy on top of that.
And helicopters are,
are pretty vulnerable flying machines.
And so this idea of what,
what they were practicing was this massive movement,
move all the troops into the combat zone very quickly and the enemy doesn't
expect you.
And you can just show up there.
So it's,
that's what they're practicing over and over again and clearly,
you know,
a Korean War veteran,
like how more was,
he knows that leaders can get killed in combat.
And so he's sometimes kill on the leaders and training.
And that's a tradition that we still had.
We do that all the time.
When I was running training the seal teams,
the minute the leaders started to get a grip on things,
it was like,
okay,
you're dead.
Next man's got to step up.
And sometimes that would just wreck a platoon or a task unit leader dies.
If they're a good leader and they're not and no one has used to stepping up,
it'd be problematic.
But sometimes it would actually be beneficial because you get some guy that's a
micromanager,
kill him and then watch everything run smoothly and you come back and you go,
dude,
you better back off a little bit cause this guy's running a better show than you
are.
And it's really clear.
So sometimes we teach guys lessons that way
back to the book.
Unfortunately,
my battalion and every other in the division now began to suffer the
consequences of President Johnson's refusal to declare a state of emergency and
extend the active duty tours of draftees and reserve officers.
The order came down,
any soldier who had less of less,
who had 60 days or less left to serve on his enlistment as of the date of
deployment,
August 16th must be left behind.
We were sick at heart.
We were being shipped off to war,
sadly under strength and crippled by the loss of almost a hundred troopers in my
battalion alone.
The very men who would be the most useful and combat those who had trained the
longest and the new techniques of helicopter warfare.
We're by this order taken away from us.
It made no sense then.
It makes no sense now.
So again,
I talked about the strategic kind of implications that these guys felt and this
is one of them,
and obviously I'm jumping through the book.
They talked more about the workup and what they did to prepare,
but now he's getting to this point where President Johnson doesn't declare a
state of emergency and keep these guys in.
And so,
you know,
that's a political decision obviously.
Uh,
but what awareness does impact,
sure it impacts the guys on the front line.
That's where it impacts.
Now like I said,
this book is written not only by,
not only by Lieutenant General Hal Moore is how he retired in this book.
I'll refer to him as lieutenant colonel or sometimes I guess I'm just a
disrespectful and call him how more,
I don't mean it disrespectfully,
but anyways,
how Moore wrote the book.
But he also wrote the book along with another guy named Joe Galloway and you
know,
you know what a ghost writer is.
Yeah,
yeah.
Ghost rider.
Well this is so ghost writer writes a book,
a person's book,
but no one's supposed to know it.
And then there's people that write the book but they get credit for it.
Right.
And you might think that's a situation here looking at the title cause you've
got Lieutenant General Harold more retired and Joseph L.
Galloway like you know,
it doesn't say any servicing.
Well
in this particular case that could give you an absolutely wrong impression
because Joe Galloway was a reporter,
a combat reporter who was obviously,
he was very courageous and,
and basically got after it for lack of a better word.
So I'll go and where they introduce him a little bit.
Back to the book,
Upi reporter Joe Galloway,
a 23 year old native of Refugio,
Texas marched with us when he hooked up with us,
he carried on his shoulder and m 16 rifle,
which the special forces commander Major Charles Beckwith had handed him when
the fight was over.
Galloway told Beckwith that strictly speaking under the Geneva Convention,
he was a civilian noncombatant Beckwith's response,
no such thing in these mountains.
Boy,
take that rifle.
So if you know anything about Charles Beckwith,
Major Charlie Beck width,
it's the guy that created delta force complete badass warrior.
And he was a special forces commander in Vietnam and was one of the first people
that apparently Galloway work with and Galloway said,
you know,
you better arm yourself.
So here's Galloway talking.
Galloway remembers my first time out with how Moore's first battalion seventh
cavalry was a hellish walk into the sun to remote Monta Guard mountain village.
We got into a patch of brush and wait a minute.
Vines so thick and phony that every step had to be carved out with machetes.
We covered maybe 300 yards in four hours and 40 to fast running chest deep
mountain stream just as darkness fell than huddled in our ponchos,
wet and freezing all night long.
At first light,
I pinched off a small piece of c four plastic explosive from the emergency
supplies in my pack and use it to boil up a canteen of water for coffee.
If you let see for very carefully,
you could be drinking hot coffee and maybe 30 seconds if you were careless,
it blew off your arm
over us.
First cigarette,
I watched more as men.
First they shaved,
shaved up here.
I was amazed.
Then the colonel himself,
blonde,
jut jawed and very intense,
uh,
son of Bardstown,
Kentucky and West Point walked by on this morning rounds with the sergeant made
with sergeant major Plumley more look to me over and said,
we all shave in my outfit.
Reporters included my steaming coffee water,
went for a wash and a shave and I gained a measure of respect for the man,
daily disciplined and all things.
You know,
that's another thing that I failed to mention,
but it's very clear when you read the book is this is 1965 and the war had not
escalated at all and it wasn't the,
the meat grinder that it turned into.
So these guys,
you know,
in their workup,
oh,
they knew that they were going to fight,
but they didn't.
They didn't know.
It wasn't the Vietnam that we think of now where there's a lot of casualties
happening if it hadn't gotten there yet.
And as a matter of fact,
this battle is really the first one where that,
where you start seeing very significant American casualties.
The guy that's in charge over how,
over how Moore is a guy named Colonel Brown and he shows up going back to the
book,
not long laughter.
Colonel Brown flew in,
checked on the situation with Alpha Company and then called me aside how I'm
moving your battalion West tomorrow morning.
He said on folding his map,
here is your area of operations,
north of two Pong and the I drank valley.
Your mission's the same one you have now find and kill the enemy.
He rapidly outlined the scope of operations and the resources he could spare 16
you h one d Hueys,
so that's a Huey helicopter.
It's the most,
I guess the the most iconic helicopter,
a probably of any military and certainly of Vietnam.
The Huey helicopter is,
is completely iconic.
16 Hueys to move my troops to one oh five howitzer batteries within range to
support us in at least two days on the ground patrolling.
He added that Alpha Company of the 229th helicopter assault helicopter battalion
would provide the helicopters.
The two 29th a company commander,
Major Bruce Crandall was on his way.
Now one more thing.
How in that area,
be sure your companies are close enough for mutual support.
So the reason I highlighted that
a lot of times people have a tendency in,
in combat situations,
especially when planning to get too far apart from each other,
then I would see this all the time.
And what happens is it,
it seems to make sense because you cover more ground or you have better angles
and it seems like a good idea.
Like,
hey,
we'll just split up and you can take care of your guys and I'll take care of my
guys.
But you always need to stay within a position where you can mutually support
each other.
Where if we get in trouble,
we can cover and move that that's what it is.
And you,
you want to be able to cover,
to move,
cover,
move.
So the minute you're out of sight,
out of line of sight,
out of radio,
out of the,
out of,
uh,
distance where your weapons can be used to support your alone.
That's the thing,
you,
you get away from the line of sight,
radio contact,
the distance that weapons can be shot effectively from the other unit that
you're out there with.
Now you are alone.
So when you're planning,
make sure,
and he's saying in that area,
I always use rule,
oh,
we as much as often as possible.
Are there times where you can,
you can,
you can flex that rule a little bit.
Of course there are there situations you can get into and you can,
it might be a better tactical call,
but always keep in mind what you're doing and what you're sacrificing when you
can no longer more mutually support the other units out you're out with and they
cannot mutually support you.
You're alone.
Mm,
okay.
So he knows this is going to be a little bit of a hot area.
At least he exists.
He suspects it.
Going back to the book,
how ready was my battalion for combat?
We had never maneuvered in combat as an entire battalion,
although all three rifle companies had been minor scrapes.
So they've been in Vietnam for a while.
They'd been in a little bit of contact,
but nothing too major and like he just said,
none of it,
none of them had been been been out as a group,
as a battalion.
Back to the book,
most of the men had never seen an enemy soldier dead or alive.
We'd killed fewer than 10 black Pajama gorillas in the get acquainted patrols
and small operations.
Since our arrival,
the four line companies had 20 of their authorized 23 officers,
but the enlisted ranks had been badly whittled down by expiring enlistments
malaria cases and requirements for base camp guards and workers back in and k
Alpha company had 115 men,
49 fewer than authorized Bravo company at 114 men was 50 short Charlie company
at 106 men down by 58 and the weapons company Delta had only 76 men.
42 fewer than authorized headquarters company was also under strength and I had
been forced to draw it down further by sending men out to fill crucial medical
and communication vacancies in the line companies.
I didn't like being shorthanded,
but things had been no different in the Korean War and somehow we made do you
just suck it up and do it?
And we would do the same.
We do the same way in the,
I drank the officer's and shows would do what they could to make up the slack
just as we had done in Korea.
So my point in reading that these guys are heavily under,
they're supposed to have 150 people and they have,
you know,
a hundred 105 whatever,
and there's nothing they could do about it.
And it's also interesting and worth noting that he has a headquarters company.
So you've got the,
the battalion commander and he's got a group of guys that do weapons for him and
also communications.
And he's pushed those guys out.
So instead of keeping those guys and making him his,
his own team,
all fat and happy,
nope,
he makes his teen thin and gives as much as he can to the,
to the forces that are out in the field.
So another good note on leadership.
No.
Now they're getting ready to roll in and we will talk about,
he's kind of going through the plan a little bit.
Here we go.
Back to the book.
I would personally land on the first helicopter pilot,
my Bruce Crandall and Bruce Granules was the commander of the helicopters that
are flying the men that would permit me a final low level look at the landing
zone and surrounding terrain and with Crandall in the front seat and me in the
back.
We can work out on the spot any last minute diversion to an alternate landers
landing zone if necessary and fix any other problems with the lift and the
American civil war.
It was a matter of principle that a good officer rode his horse as little as
possible.
There were sound reasons for this.
If you are riding and your soldiers are marching,
how can you judge how tired they are?
How thirsty,
how heavy their packs way on their shoulders.
I applied the same philosophy in Vietnam where every battalion commander had his
own command and control helicopter.
Some commanders use their helicopters,
their personal mountain.
I never believed in that.
You had to get on the ground with your troops to see and hear what was
happening.
You have to soak up firsthand information for your instincts to operate
accurately.
Besides,
it's too easy to be crisp,
cool and detached at 1500 feet to easy to demand the impossible of your troops.
Too easy to make mistakes that are fatal only to those souls far below in the
mud,
the blood and confusion.
So this is something we talk about all the time from a leadership perspective,
do you cannot be,
you know,
it's,
it's the,
it's the dichotomy of detachment,
right?
It does pay.
And there's certain times where you can tell in these situations,
if you're in the command helicopter that's up above the fighting,
well,
you're,
you're defacto.
I mean you,
you are detached from the situation and you can see what's happening and you
have,
you have a good view of what's going on.
But even though we have a good view,
you're also missing a bunch.
You're missing what it's like down there.
You're missing what the men are seeing.
You'll missing one.
It looks like to them,
you're missing the communication breakdowns that are happening down there.
So you have to find that balance between these two.
And,
and he clearly is aware of that.
He's preparing for this and he's got a book,
a book,
okay.
Called Street without joy by a guy named Bernard fall.
And it's,
it's a book about Vietnam.
It spoke about the,
the,
the tragedy that the French troops went through fighting the Vietnamese and he
says that he took one lesson away from that book and this is the lesson,
death is the price you pay for underestimating this tenacious enemy.
Hmm.
So he was aware and like General Mattis said,
you know,
not too long ago they were talking about General Madison,
how can we read so many books?
And he says,
cause I get to see,
I get to learn.
And this is a classic case.
He,
he knew,
he read books about the,
the French that had fought the Vietnamese what,
10 years earlier,
11 years earlier.
And that made him more prepared.
Okay.
Now talking a little bit.
Like I said,
there's a,
there's great information in here about the enemy and like I said,
they went and interviewed and got reports from the enemy
and here we go.
A little bit about the enemy.
Back to the book,
the soldiers commanded by Brigadier General Chu [inaudible] man had been
training for more than 18 months when they joined the people's army.
Each recruit was issued to khaki shirts,
two pairs of khaki trousers,
a sewing kit,
and a pair of Ho Chi Minh sandals cut from used tire trucks.
Those uniforms were expected to last five years.
Basic training lasted 13 weeks,
six days a week,
6:00 AM to 9:15 PM the instructor's emphasized weapons and tactics.
The house of warfare,
while the political commissaries had time,
had time set aside each day to lecture on the why's of this war.
The recruits were reminded constantly that their fathers had beaten the French
colonialists.
Now it was their duty to defeat the American imperialists.
They were imbued with hace men's dictum.
Nothing is more precious than freedom and independence.
After basic training.
Some were selected for six months of NCO school and would emerge as new
corporals for the rest.
Advanced infantry training included familiarization with all weapons,
the use of explosive ambush tactics,
recognizance tactics,
adjusting mortar fire and patrol tactics.
And June of 1964 man soldiers moved up into the mountains of north Vietnam,
Vietnam terrain similar to that in Western highlands of South Vietnam.
Here,
physical conditioning was emphasized.
They scaled steep slopes while wearing rucksacks loaded with 50 to 60 pounds of
rocks.
They're advanced training now also focused on the art of camouflage when the
time came for them to begin the arduous two month journey down the Ho Chi Minh
trail through Laos General Man's regiment broke down into battalions for
security purposes.
Each moving separately,
at least three days ahead of the next.
Each soldier carried four pounds of rice,
seven days rations,
plus another eight pounds of food stuffs that we're expected to last him the
whole trip.
Two pounds of salt,
two pounds of wheat flour,
and four pounds of salt pork.
One man in every squad carried the aluminum cook pot that would,
that the squads rice would be boiled in.
Each man also carried 50 anti-malaria pills,
one for each day on the trail and a hundred vitamin B,
one tabs to be taken at the rate of three per week.
Despite the pills,
virtually every man who walked the trail contract and malaria and on average
three or four soldiers of each 160 man company would die on the journey.
Malaria,
diarrhea,
accidents,
poisonous snakes and American error rates took their toll.
Mans soldiers march nine miles each day.
The distance between rest camps where they spent each night,
every day,
every fourth,
they stayed in camp taking the day off to rest up,
wash their clothes and tend to minor medical problems.
So this is a legit enemy.
We're looking at legit enemy,
organized,
well trained,
hard,
tough,
well led
and
and ready and you can't ever,
you know,
this is one of the biggest problems with fighting a counterinsurgency is you're
going against someone that's fighting on their home turf and that is just that
you can't eat.
How do you overcome that?
Advantage.
Well,
you overcome that advantage with firepower with some technology,
but that is a hard advantage to overcome.
Yeah,
and here's a quote from General An,
when you landed there,
you landed right in the middle of three of our battalions of the 66 regimen.
Our service,
our reserve force,
it was the strongest we had at full strength.
The battalion's each had about 450 men.
Also,
there was a headquarters battalion.
The is total strength was about 1600 men,
so they're kind of by chance set up on the same spot where these guys are going
to go in,
which is l z x Ray Landing Zone X ray,
and here these,
they're flying in into the Lz x-ray captain John Heron,
who's Bravo company,
troops filled the helicopter recalls.
It was a cool,
it was a misty cool morning with some low hanging fog when we lifted off,
but shortly after takeoff we broke into the clear and you could see the one oh
five artillery pounding the areas around the Lz as we headed in Vietnam.
Even in war was scenic with green jungle,
heavy forested mountains and wild looking rivers criss crossing the terrain.
Now the helicopters of the Ariel rocket artillery slammed the perimeter with
rockets,
grenades,
and machine gun fire using 24 of the 48 2.7 inch rockets.
They carried,
so it's the,
it's the same thing that we've heard before.
It's covered move right as you come into a landing zone like they did in d day,
what do you do first?
You bomb the crap out of it.
You hit it with naval gunfire and they're doing the same thing here.
They're prepping the landing zone by dropping a bunch of one oh five howitzers
into the,
around the surrounding area,
around the landing zone,
and then the helicopters wants,
it's too close and the and the howitzers have to turn off.
Then the helicopter starts shooting and they do their best to clear the area
around the landing zone.
That's what's going on.
Okay.
Back to the book,
the People's Army commander on the battlefield.
Then senior Lieutenant Colonel Nguyen,
who on says when you drop troops into x,
I was on Tupac Mountain.
We had a very strong position and a strong mobile command group.
We were ready.
Had prepared for you and expected you to come.
The only question was when the trees and Bush limited our view of the
helicopters landing,
but we had an observation post on top of the mountain and they reported to us
when you dropped troops and when you move them.
So
man,
you know I talk about all the time about having the high ground.
Well,
when these guys are landing in a valley and they're surrounded by hand,
high grounds,
so it's a,
you're at,
you're at a tactical disadvantaged there,
right?
As soon as it just about,
as soon as they hit the ground,
they're there for a little while and they get a prisoner.
The the Americans get a prisoner and here's there's a translator and he
translates the prisoners words.
And here's what the prisoner says.
Well,
here's what the translator says.
He says,
there are three battalions on the mountain who want very much to kill Americans
but have not been able to find any.
Now you take that with a grain of salt because it's coming from a prisoner,
but it's not nothing.
I'll put it to you that way.
It's something
back to the book.
Suddenly a few rifle shots rang out in the area where the prisoner had been
captured.
Sergeant Gill,
Ruth's men were in contact.
It was now 12:15 PM we had to move fast.
If we were going to survive,
had to get off the landing zone and hit them before they could hit us.
Only if we brought the enemy to battle deep in the trees and brush.
Could we stand even a slim chance of holding onto the clearing and getting the
rest of the battalion landed.
That football field size clearing was our lifeline and our supply line.
If the enemy close the way to the helicopters,
all of us would die in this place.
So that's one of the,
one of the hard things about helicopter warfare,
especially in Vietnam,
well actually anywhere is you go,
that's great.
You can go a long distance and get in there.
But then once you're there,
there's,
if the helicopters can't come get you out or they can't resupply you,
you're in real problem.
You're,
you're back to the word that I said earlier.
You're alone.
Back to the book.
Even as the first shots rang out,
I was rating Ewing heron to saddle up the rest of Bravo company,
the rest of his [inaudible] Bravo company men and move out fast toward the
mountain to develop a situation turning to the,
and he's again,
there's all these characters.
I mean there's,
there's all the company commanders that platoon commanders,
the platoon leaders,
the platoon sergeants,
there's the ground troops,
there's all these characters and,
and the book does an outstanding job of detailing who all these individuals were
and what their background was,
where they came from.
And I,
I just don't,
we,
we can't do that right now,
but that's why you buy the book and you read the book.
But this guy and the doll is one of the company commanders.
So here we go,
turning them into doll.
I told them that the original plan was out the window,
that his Alpha company should immediately take over [inaudible] security and get
ready to move up on Bravo.
Company's left when Charlie,
when enough of Charlie Company and arrived on the next lift who assumed the job
of securing and clearing.
So
classic.
You hit the ground and and now all of a sudden the plan is out the window.
Right out the window.
We're going with our standard operating procedures,
which is,
hey,
we're going to move a company here.
You're going to set up perimeter security and go back to the book and a small
cops,
the other two platoons,
platoons of Bravo company men had opened c ration cans and we're grabbing a
bite.
When they heard the first shots in the brush,
the older sergeants glanced at one another and nodded,
eat fast.
They told the men and get ready to move the battle of Lz x ray had just begun
and it,
it doesn't take long to begin.
Going back to the book says Sergeant Gill Wreath,
we were virtually pinned to the ground and taking casualties.
Lieutenant Dennis deal remembers that moment.
Daphne's platoon was taking moderate fire.
We could all hear it through the foliage and I heard the crackling on my radio
hour wasn't some sort of trouble.
The firing,
it increased in volume and intensity.
Then I saw my first wounded trooper,
probably the first American wounded in Lz x Ray.
He was shot in the neck or mouth or both was still carrying his rifle,
was ambulatory and appeared stunned at what had happened to him.
When he asked where to go.
I put my arm around him and pointed to where I had last seen the battalion
commander.
So it's immediately on and you of course it is cause there's,
there's three battalions of Vietnamese soldiers there.
Hmm.
And this is,
this is how I'm more talking back to the book of the Military Historian Sla.
Marshall wrote that at the beginning of a battle units fractionalize groping
between the antagonist takes place and the battle takes form from all of this.
Marshall had it right.
That is precisely what was happening up in the scrub brush.
A brush above landing zone x ray this day and no other single event would have
greater impact on the shape of this battle than what Lieutenant Henry heric was
in the process of doing.
Herrick charged,
right past lieutenant devotees,
men swung his platoon to the right in hot pursuit of a few fleeting m enemy
soldiers and disappeared from sight into the Bush says Sergeant Ernie savage of
Herricks orders.
He made a bad decision and we knew at the time it was a bad decision.
We were breaking contact with the rest of the company.
We were supposed to come up on the flank of first platoon.
In fact,
we were moving away from them.
We lost contact with everyone.
Everybody.
So again,
this is what I just talked about
and it's you're going to see throughout this book all these principles that we
talk about all the time that that we taught and that we live through.
You can see that these types of things happen.
And here's a classic thing I was just about like when you get out of distance
from your supporting elements,
you're now alone
and that's a bad situation to be in.
Back to the book now,
John Heron was up on my radio reporting that his men were under heavy attack by
at least two enemy companies and that his second platoon was in danger of being
surrounded and cut off from the rest of the company even as he spoke,
mortar and rocket rounds hit in the clearing where I stood.
My worst case scenario had just come to pass.
We are now in heavy contact.
Before all my battalion was on the ground and now I had to deal with a cutoff
platoon.
My response was an angry shit.
Coptic captain John Herons estimate that is Bravo company.
Men were trying to deal with two enemy companies,
was slightly off one full enemy battalion.
More than 500 determined enemy soldiers was boiling down the mountain toward
Herricks trapped second platoon and maneuvering near Al de Vinnie's pinned down
first platoon.
Again,
here's something that I failed to talk about with helicopter warfare.
So he's got a battalion of 500 guys,
550 guys that you can't fit all those guys on 16 helicopters.
So you've got to do multiple laps.
And that's what he's,
he's worried.
He was worried about it going in that,
hey,
I want to get my whole battalion on the ground before the fighting starts.
He's already failed to do that.
Or maybe he hasn't failed to do it,
but it didn't happen.
Back to the book.
I was tempted to join the dolls or Edwards men,
but resisted the temptation.
I had no business getting involved with the actions of only one company.
I might get pinned down and simply become another rifleman.
My duty was to lead riflemen.
So there's,
uh,
you know,
we talked about the detachment that he said,
hey,
look,
I'm not going to be up in the helicopter,
but right now he's saying,
look,
I'm not gonna be in a helicopter overhead at 1500 feet,
but I'm not going to be sitting in a platoon as a rifleman,
slugging it out with the enemy.
That's not the right place to be either.
You have to lead in,
in order to lead,
you have to take a step back.
You have to detach and he does that to the best of his ability.
Okay,
and here we go.
Back to the book just now.
The snaps and cracks are the rounds passing nearby.
Took on a distinctly different sound like a swarm of bees around our heads.
I was on the radio trying to hear a transmission over the noise when I felt a
firm hand on my right soldier shoulder.
It was sergeant major plum Lee's.
He shouted over the racket of the firefight serve.
You don't find some cover,
you're going to go down and if you go down,
we all go down plum leaders,
right as always,
anyone waving,
yelling,
hand signaling or talking on the radio was instantly targeted by the enemy.
These guys were quick to spot and shoot leaders,
radio operators and medics.
I had never fretted about being wounded in combat in Korea or here,
but Plumley brought me up short.
The game was just beginning.
This was no time for me to go of it.
The sergeant major pointed to a large termite hill,
six or seven feet high,
located in some trees in the waste between the two open areas of the landing
zone.
It was about 30 yards away in three of us turned and ran toward it with bullets
kicking up red dirt around our feet and the bee's still buzzing around our heads
that termite hill,
the size of a large automobile would become the battalion command post the aid
station,
the supply point,
the collection area for enemy prisoners,
weapons and equipment,
and the place where our dead were brought.
Yeah,
casualties.
We're now beginning to pile up as we dropped behind that termite hill.
I fleetingly thought about an illustration,
an illustrious predecessor of mine in the Seventh Cavalry,
Lieutenant Colonel George Armstrong Custer and his final stay stand in the
valley of little big horn in Montana 89 years earlier.
I was determined that history would not repeat itself in the Valley of the I
drank.
We were a tight,
well trained and disciplined fighting force and we had one thing,
George Custer did not have fire support.
Fire support plays it.
It's,
it's beyond critical.
I mean they would not have been able to do this without fire support and that's
the one thing that's going to save them.
I mean obviously the discipline,
obviously the training,
obviously the bravery,
but the fire support is,
is a gift.
[inaudible]
back to the book
Sergeant Steve Hanson was behind and to the right of lieutenant Taft.
He says,
we moved at a trot across the open grass toward the tree line and heard fire up
on the finger to the West where we were headed.
My radio operator,
friend specialist for Ray Turner,
Rea Tanner and I crossed the stream bed captain noodles party and the two other
platoons were off to the right.
Lieutenant Taft was well forward as we crossed over into the trees.
Okay.
Sergeant First Class Lorenzo Nathan rate.
Turner and I were close,
maybe 10 yards behind.
We were moving fast.
Specialists Spec for Pete Winter was near me.
We ran into a wall of led.
Every man in the lead squad was shot from the time we got the order to move to
the time where men were dying was only five minutes.
The enemy.
We're very close to us and overran some of our dead.
The firing was heavy.
Sergeant Nathan pulled us back out of the woods of the stream bed.
Okay.
Bob Hazen.
Bob Taft's radio operator recalls lieutenant Taft got out in front of me.
I was off to his left.
He had his,
he had his radio.
He had the radio handset in his left hand,
connected to the radio on my back.
Would that flux at flexible rubber wire.
It got tight and I pulled back on the lieutenant and hollered,
we're getting offline.
He glanced back at me,
turn back to his front and took four more steps.
Then he fired two shots at something I couldn't see what.
Then he dropped face down on the ground.
Lieutenant Taft was hit.
I didn't realize how bad until I rolled him over.
He was shot in the throat and the rounded ricocheted down and come out his left
side.
He was dead and it was difficult to roll them over.
Even though he was a slightly built man captain,
the DOL says the enemy on the mountain started moving down rapidly in somewhat
uncoordinated attacks.
They streamed down the hill and down the creek bed.
The enemy knew the area.
They came down the best covered route.
The third platoon was heavily engaged in the volume of firing.
Reached a crescendo on my left.
At this time,
I lost con radio contact with Taft's platoon in the center of that fury,
Bob Hazen struggled.
Enrolled is dead platoon leader rover.
He was gone and there was nothing we could do.
The first thing I thought of was what they taught me.
Never let the enemy get his hands on a mapper.
The signals code book,
I got those from lieutenant Taft and was kneeling over to try and pull his body
back.
That's when my radio was hit and the shrapnel from the radio hit me in the back
of the head.
It didn't really hurt.
All of a sudden,
I was just laying face down on the ground next to lieutenant Taft.
I felt something running down my trick.
My down my neck reached back and came out with a handful of blood.
Carmen Maselli was on Hasan's,
right?
We knew what had happened the word past fast.
They got lieutenant Taft
again.
We're talking within minutes of these guys arriving.
This is going completely sideways.
Yeah.
Back to the book captain and a doll out of radio contact with Taf Splatoon mood
moved toward the furious firing on his left flank to find out what was
happening.
Nodal says my radio operator,
Sergeant Jack e Gell,
the company communications chief who had volunteered to carry one of my two
radios ran with me out from out of the creek bed and into the open area toward
tasks position.
We ran into sergeant Nathan and I asked him what was happening.
He said the platoon had been attacked on the left flank.
The left squad had taken a number of casualties and had pulled back out of the
creek bed,
refusing their left enemy.
The left flank to the enemy.
Nathan said Taft had been hit and was left in the creek bed.
That made me angry.
We'd been taught never to leave any wounded or dead on the battlefield.
Sergeant Gal and I crawled forward of our lines to that creek bed where the
enemy,
where to find Taft.
We came under grenade attack from the west side of the creek bed but had some
cover from a few trees.
We located Taft dead while bringing him back.
We saw another soldier who had been left behind after leaving calf's body with
his platoon gal and I went back again and we picked the other man
back to the book.
Dennis deal remembers.
We moved online for about a hundred or 150 yards before the volume of firing
forced us to stop.
We were taking too many casualties.
I radioed Herricks platoon and said,
I think we're getting close to you.
Shoot one round off weight to the count of three and shoot two more.
The radio man or whoever was on the radio did that.
So we had a pretty good fix on where he was.
We got up and started the assault again.
We went about 10 yards and the whole thing just blew in.
Our faces blew up in our faces.
The enemy have infiltrated between Herricks platoon and us and now we're
starting to come behind us.
So that platoon that had gotten separated,
this element with Dennis deal was going out to try and get contact with them and
bring them back inside the perimeter.
They meet,
they,
they're assaulting,
they go 100 yards,
150 yards and they started getting mowed down
and now they realize that in between they've got bad guys in between where
Herricks platoon is and where the rest of the perimeter is set up.
Cause they do have kind of a rough perimeter on this,
on this landing zone,
in the landing zone.
Apologize for not explaining this to me in order to bring in helicopters and the
junk,
would you need some open space?
So the landing zone,
Lz x ray has an area where there's not much foliage for whatever reason.
And so that's where they've kind of consolidated their forces only cause they
can't go anywhere else.
They hit the ground,
they start getting shot at.
So now they're setting up what's called a perimeter and obviously Herricks
platoon is outside the perimeter.
Yeah.
Back to the book lieutenant deal ads that he and another,
he and the other two platoon leaders now began planting.
Yet another attempt to break through and rescue Herricks men leaders were
running back and forth coordinating.
When all of a sudden firing began,
the Lord dissipated quickly.
It was at this time my weapons squad leader,
Sergeant Curry,
the chief was killed.
His last words war.
Those bastards are trying to get me.
He was caught rolling around on the ground.
Later on is my men were carrying and back.
I had them put them down and turned his face toward me and looked at him.
I could not conceive of the chief being dead
Staff Sergeant Wilbert Curry,
junior of Buffalo,
New York was 35 years old.
Eric and the other two squads were holding precariously to the small knoll near
the bottom of the finger savage.
So
a kid named savage is out there with Herricks platoon and he ends up running a
lot of stuff and you'll find that out.
But here,
here we start hearing a little bit of him.
Right now.
Savage teamed up with Mchenry Squad,
which was pinned to the ground.
Heric was with that squad.
Sergeant Zealand squad was off to the left rear.
Savage checked on his men when he tied up with McHenry.
He knew that Spec for Robert M.
Hill m 79 granted year was no longer with them.
He got killed in there somewhere.
He had his m 79 and a 45 caliber pistol and he was firing both at the same time.
The 23 year old hill came from Starkville,
Mississippi.
Yeah,
and here's sergeant savage talking,
explaining some more back to the book.
The enemy was passed the machine gun before it ever quit firing.
I could hear sergeant hurdled down there cursing even even over the firefight.
I heard him.
He was famous for that mother Fucker,
son of a bitch.
I could hear him hollering that down there when they through.
Then they threw grenades on him.
Hurdle 36 was from Washington DC.
Barren bomb 24 was a native of New York City,
Pfc Donald Roddy.
22 hailed from Ann Arbor,
Michigan.
Okay.
The three of them died in a hail of rifle fire and enemy grenades.
Yeah,
the enemy down below turns.
Surgeon hurdles m 60 around and began using it on the Americans on the knoll.
So that causes all kinds of confusion.
You can tell the difference between different types of weapons by the way they
sound when they shoot and when someone starts shooting a friendly weapon at you.
It's caused a lot of confusion and the [inaudible] is a beast of a weapon
belt fed machine gun and it's when I've gotten the seal teams.
That was the,
that was the machine gun that we used was the [inaudible] machine gun and it's a
devastating weapon.
Back to the book,
the enemy more than 150 strong now attack the knoll from three sides north,
south,
and east and soldiers on both sides were falling.
Lieutenant Herrick ran from trooper,
the trooper trying to get a defense organized an enemy volley cut across
Herrick,
his radio operator specialist John,
our Stewart and the three Rick and the artillery recon sergeant,
Sergeant John T.
Brown wounding,
all three Herrick and Brown.
Seriously.
Stewart took a single bullet through the leg,
Herrick radioed Bravo company commander John Harrington told him he had been hit
and he was turning the command of the platoon over to Sergeant Carl Palmer.
Herrick then gave explicit instructions to his men to destroy the singles codes,
redistribute the ammunition and calling artillery and if possible,
make a break for it.
Okay.
Heron says,
I give Herrick all the credit in the world for pulling that platoon together so
they could make their stand.
Okay,
so should we all savage and Zac Allen paint a clear picture of a green young
lieutenant who did a superb job in a hailstorm of enemy fire.
His platoon stopped the very large north Vietnamese unit,
clearly heading down to join the attack on the landing zone.
I long ago concluded that the very presence of this platoon so far to the
northwest confused the enemy commander as to exactly where we were and how far
we had penetrated in all directions and thus helped us,
helped us as the battle built.
Sergeant savage recounts the final moments of Henry Herricks life.
He was lying beside me on the hill and he said,
if I have to die,
I'm glad to give my life for my country.
I remember him saying that he was going into shock.
He had in the hip and in and a lot of pain.
He didn't live long.
He died early in the fight.
Next to a little brush pile
spec for Charles,
our lows,
22 of mobile ammo.
Alabama was the new platoon medic.
He joined the platoon only a few days earlier.
Lieutenant Harris was kneeling when hit,
he had a bullet wound to the hip.
He told me to go help the other wounded.
Yeah,
it's,
we have to remember that this Guy Herrick is like 22,
23 year old,
fresh out of him.
He's a first,
he might even be 21.
Um,
and he made that majorly offensive move and pursued and got out of touch.
But what,
how more saying,
hey,
that confused the enemy,
even though it confused the friendlies.
Sue,
it confused the enemy as well.
So there's some,
there's some good that came out of it.
Back to the book.
Sergeant Reuben Thomas was struck by a bullet above his heart that exited under
his left arm,
bleeding heavily.
He grabbed a rifle and fought on the encircled infantry men of the lost platoon
refuse to give up.
Here's what specialists,
Doorman said,
we were all on the ground now and if you moved,
you got hit.
Our training really showed.
Then we shifted into defensive positions.
We had five men killed in 25 minutes.
Then all of a sudden they try to mass assault from three directions,
rushing from Bush to Bush laying fire on us.
We put our m sixteens on full automatic and killed most of them.
Another guy named Galen Bong,
bong,
them said,
we gathered up all the full magazines we could find and stack them up in front
of us.
There was no way we could dig a foxhole.
The handle was blown off my entrenching tool and one of my canteens had all hole
blown through it.
The fire was so heavy that if he tried to raise up to dig,
you are dead.
There was death and destruction all around
my now eight men of the platoons,
29 had been killed in action on other 13 were wounded.
The 25 yard wide perimeter was a circle of pain,
death,
fear,
and raw courage.
Medic Charlie,
Lowe's crawled from man to man throughout the raging firefight,
doing his best to patch the wounded with limited supplies.
His medical pack,
although he himself was wounded twice,
Lowe's never slowed his pace.
He would keep all 13 of the wounded alive for the four 26 long Harwin hours.
Low says on several occasions I had to stand or sit up to treat the wounded.
Each time the VC fired heavily at me.
Lowe's used his 45 and m 16 rifle too,
to help defend his patients.
Okay.
Of getting attacked from three sides,
13 wounded,
eight dead.
Was it nine dead?
Unbelievable.
Back to the book command had passed.
So this is talking about,
you know,
when you,
when someone,
if the leader gets killed,
it goes to the next person.
That person gets killed,
So here's what's happening in Herricks platoon.
The loss platoon back to the book command had passed from Lieutenant Henry
Herrick to Sergeant Carl Palmer to Sergeant Robert Stokes and each intern died
fighting.
Now it was the turn of Buck Sergeant Ernie savage.
Sergeant savage came up on the radio.
Captain Haren recalls,
he said Herrick Palmer and stokes were dead to give him more artillery and he
would direct it in as close as possible.
We could never establish the platoons exact position,
but lieutenant riddle could adjust fire on savages sensing.
And he began to do that.
The extraordinary unyielding resistance that the dozen or so effective fighting
fighters we're putting up.
Plus the artillery barrages that Ernie savage was bringing down.
Finally beat off the heavy enemy attack,
Ernie savage and his small band hunkered down,
determined to hold their ground to the end.
Okay.
Yeah.
And these guys are calling into danger calls.
If we were talking about danger close,
no,
no.
Okay.
Danger close is when you're calling in fire support and you want it to be very
close to where you are and you on the ground have to take responsibility for it.
So in other words,
the the person,
whether it's artillery,
whether it's aircraft,
you have to call and say danger close.
Yes.
Send the rounds.
We know it's close.
It's we take responsibility for what happens.
Yeah.
And by the way,
going back to the book as this fifth left lift of the day roared out at treetop
level,
the landing zone was suddenly turned red hot,
so they haven't even landed everyone yet.
But this is going on.
They haven't even gotten everyone on the landing zone yet.
And here's Crandall talking.
And again,
he's the the pilot,
unbelievably heroic pilot and a commanding officer of this helicopter unit says,
Crandall,
as I was flaring out to touchdown,
we started receiving heavy,
heavy ground fire.
I had three dead in three wounded on my board,
bird,
the wounded included my crew who had been hitting the throat.
When we landed,
we saw that every bullet had struck the wounded in the head or neck.
Excellent marksman ship by the other side and not a happy thought for a
helicopter pilot to say the least.
So the the enemy's taking head shots
back to the book with Crandall Flying Serpent Yellow three where chief warrant
officer's Ricardo,
Jay Lombardo 34 of Hartford,
Connecticut and Alex s pop Jekyll 43 of Seattle,
Washington.
Pop Jekyll was a father of nine children during World War II at the age of 20 he
had flown beat 20 fours out of England and be 29 during the postwar years until
he left the service in 1950 pop Jekyll reenlisted in in 1952 it had been flying
helicopters since 1963 pop Jekyll keyed the inner calm and said I flew 31
missions in [inaudible] in World War II and that's the closest I've ever come to
swallowing my balls.
So these,
these landing zones were crazy with these helicopter pilots flying in there.
It's,
it's,
you're here,
you're getting there as fast as you can,
but there's not much you can do.
You know,
you bring it in as fast as you can.
You try and get loaded up quick and you try and take off,
but it's not like you're able to shoot back.
Even once you're on the ground,
your machine gunners in the huge,
they can't shoot anymore cause you don't know where the friendly troops are,
so you're a sitting duck,
literally a sitting duck and these pilots going in time and time and time again.
This goes to the Delta company commander La Phaedra and here's what's going on.
Love Bro.
Seriously wounded was phasing was fading fast.
I lost a lot of blood.
I could see people shooting but I couldn't hear any sounds anymore.
I told John Heron somebody had to take over.
I called again,
Colonel Moore and told him that I was going to turn over the company to Sargent
Gonzalez.
Yeah.
Then the medic arrived to bandage my wound.
Shortly after I remember someone putting me in a Poncho and hauling me over to
the area of the battalion command post.
When I saw lieutenant to Ibotta again later,
we never did talk much about it.
It was just too damn close to the real thing.
Raila,
Phaedra and his handful of Den Delta Company troopers had unknowingly joined the
Alpha company flight at a crucial moment.
About 30 North Vietnamese were flanking the dolls.
Men on their left and captain,
the Febreze,
Febreze party ran smack into them and killed most of them.
The dolls,
men dispatch the rest unknown to [inaudible].
Sergeant Gonzales had been hit in the face by an enemy.
Bullet Gonzalez simply said,
Roger,
when the fabric told him he was now in command and for the next half,
hour and a half,
he ran Delta company
Sergeant Gonzales shot in the face.
No factor.
I mean it still going to take leadership right now,
going back to the book,
it was during all this core that Beck remembers fear coming over him and here's
backtalking.
While doc nall was here with me working on Russell fear,
real fear hit me fear like I had never known before.
Fear comes in once you recognize it and accepted a passes just as fast as it
comes and you really don't have to think about it anymore.
You just do what you have to do,
but you learn the real meaning of fear and life and death.
For the next two hours,
I was alone on that gun shooting the enemy anymore shooting at me and bullets
were hitting the ground beside me and cracking above my head.
They were attacking me and I fired as fast as I could in long bursts.
My m 60 was cooking.
I had to take a crap and elite bad,
so I pulled my pants down while laying on my side and did it on my side taking
fire at the time.
Now we're going back to how more talking here from my command post at the
Termite Hill,
the enemy were clearly visible a hundred yards to the south.
They were damned good soldiers used cover and concealment to perfection and were
deadly shots.
Most of my dead and wounded soldiers had been shot in the head or upper body.
The North Vietnamese paid particular attention to radio operators and leaders.
They did not appear to have radios themselves.
They controlled their men by shalts waves pointing whistles and sometimes bugle
calls.
It was 2:45 PM all three of my rifle companies were heavily engaged.
We had lost the use of the larger clearing for the helicopter landings,
wounded.
We're streaming into the command post aid station.
We were in a desperate fixed and I was worried that it could become even more
desperate.
By now I believe we were fighting at least two people's armies battalions.
Turns out it was three they were very determined to wipe us out.
But a major difference between Lieutenant Colonel Merwin who on of the People's
Army of Vietnam and lieutenant colonel,
how more of the First Cavalry Division was that I had major fire support and he
didn't.
Air Force Captain Bruce Wallace and his fellow a one e Skyraider pilots as well
as the jet fighter bombers from all three services help provide that edge flying
50 sorties and close air support that Sunday afternoon says Wallace,
the importance of airplanes and a vulgar brawl is to be down among the palm
trees with the troops,
putting ordinance on the ground at the exact time and the precise place that the
ground command needs it.
And then so he there in these old school,
uh,
Sky Raiders,
but then Captain Wallace is talking about what it was like watching the
helicopters back to the book with it.
It was different with a Huey to watch for eight of them at a time maneuvering up
and down and latterly and even backwards boggles the f the fighter pilots mind
those guys swarm a target like bees over honey.
I had to hand it to those Huey guys.
They really got down there in the trees with the troops.
Then this is how America,
how more talking again,
the field artillery,
what we called Tube artillery to distinguish how it's your folks from the
helicopter rocket folks proudly calls itself the King of battle.
The brave cannon cockers and Lz Falcon went without sleep for three days and
three nights to help keep us surrounded by a wall of steel.
Those two batteries,
12 guns fired more than 4,000 rounds of high explosive shells on the first day
alone
says Barker on the first afternoon,
both batteries fired for effect directly on target for five straight hours.
One of Bruce Crandall's,
Huey slick pilots.
Captain Paul Winkle touched down at Falcon briefly that at first afternoon and
was astounded by what he saw.
There were stacks of shell casings at least 10 feet high and exhausted gun
crews.
They had fired for effect for three state straight hours.
By then without even pausing to level the bubbles.
One Tube was burned out too at busted hydraulics.
That's some shooting.
No matter how bad things got for Americans fighting for their lives on the x ray
perimeter,
we could look out into the scrub brush and every direction internet seeding
inferno of exploding artillery shells,
2.75 inch rockets,
napalm canisters,
250 and 500 pound bombs and 20 millimeter cannon fire and thank God and our
lucky stars that we didn't have to walk through that to get to work.
Yeah.
So like I said,
the,
the close air support is absolute or the close air support.
The artillery is absolutely what and that's,
that's been happened many on many occasions for,
for American soldiers,
sailors,
marines,
overseas fighting,
uh,
you know,
the air force,
the Navy pilots,
the Marine Corps,
five pilots coming in.
And actually the guy in the ground controlling these guys is an air force pilot
as well.
So having that air superiority is a wonderful thing.
Now,
speaking of the aviators,
going back to the helicopters,
chapter nine in this book is called brave aviators in it.
Again,
these sitting ducks coming in is crazy to to read about.
Going back to the book.
Over the 20 months of air mobile trading,
a bond had been welded between the infantry and their rides,
the Huey helicopter pilots and crewman.
Now the strength of that bond will be tested in the hottest of fires if the air
bridge failed.
So the meaning the helicopters ability to get in there.
If the air bridge failed,
the embattled men of First Battalion Seventh Cav would certainly die in much the
same way George Armstrong Custer's cavalry men died at little big horn cutoff
surrounded by numerically superior forces overrun and butchered to the last man
I asked Bruce can't Crandall's brave air crews of Alpha Company,
the 229th aviation battalion for the last measure of devotion for service far
beyond the limits of duty and mission.
And they came through as I knew they would.
Okay.
And so,
so again,
you're basically asking these guys to get shot down every time they fly in.
And this is interesting.
Back to the book.
This was early in the war and the medivac commanders had decreed that there
birds would not land in hot landing zones.
You,
in other words,
that they would not go where they were needed,
when,
when they were needed the most.
Even before I asked Bruce Crandall at our,
decided to begin doing everything that had to be done,
staying with it.
Crandall now dropped this Huey loaded with casualties onto the red dirt strip.
When we hit,
and this is,
this is grant Crandall talking.
When we hit the ground,
we were met by medics and infantry troops still waiting to be lifted into x-ray.
So that's another crazy thing to think about.
Your,
you're unloading wounded men and you're,
and you're getting on that aircraft that's going to go pick up more when you
remember you're going to stay.
So the troops that aren't on the ground yet think about what's going through
their minds.
Hmm.
They,
they remove the dead end and you wanna know what's going through their minds.
I actually,
I actually know what's going through their mind.
They're going,
most of those guys are saying,
get me in there as fast as you can.
That's what they're saying.
These are the brothers out there.
Hmm.
Back to the book.
They remove the dead and wounded from my bird and this act is engraved in my
mind deeper than any other experience in my two tours in Vietnam and huge black
enlisted man clad only in shorts and boots,
hands bigger than dinner plates reached into my helicopter to pick up one of the
dead white soldiers.
He had tears streaming down his face and he tenderly created,
cradled that dead soldier to his chest as he walked slowly from the aircraft to
the medical station.
I never knew if the man he picked up was his buddy or not.
I suspect not.
His grief was for a fallen comrade and for the agony that violent death brings
to those who witness it.
Okay.
More about the helicopters.
Back to the book.
One of the ships brought in Larry Litton who immediately took over command of
Delta Company from the wounded Sergeant Gonzales.
I told him to add the four Delta mortars to consolidate mortar positions set up
by Captain Edwards and to control all seven mortars from a single fire direction
center principal direction of fire was towards Alpha and Bravo companies and the
mortar men would also have the mission of defending our to chopper landing zones
from the east.
And the reason I highlighted that is even though I talk about decentralized
command all the time and how more starts off the book talking about how
important decentralized command is,
he's right now in that in that moment he's centralizing command.
He needs to get control of all the mortars so that they can use it correctly.
So again,
that's why it's the dichotomy of,
because you can,
there's times when you,
most of the time you decentralized,
but you can actually decentralize too much.
And if you don't coordinate,
the efforts of these mortars are not going to use them effectively.
So he centralizes the command of the mortars,
brings them all into one location and starts using them effectively.
So that's a good note for leaders to remember.
Okay.
Now here's another platoon commander Joe Marm.
Joe Marm describes the situation in his platoon.
My platoon medic was a short timer and did not accompany us to chew Pong.
Sergeant First Class George Mccauley,
the platoon sergeant carried the aid kit and we plan to use staff sergeant
Thomas Tall lover as our medic when the need arose.
He had been a combat medic during the Korean War and it was well qualified.
Still.
We did not have enough medics to go round,
so we sent down specialists boot night and specialists.
Charles Lowe is a senior medical aid man as platoon medics to Bravo company.
Now Calvin boop night,
still alive,
but mortally wounded was laid gently on the ground and his blood filled rubber
poncho before the medical platoon.
Sergeant Sergeant First Class Keaton,
his friend and comrade for the last two years.
And here's what Keaton says,
boot night wasn't dead.
He was shot right between the soldiers right directly between the sore
shoulders.
He reached up and took my hand and said,
Sarge,
I didn't make it.
We got an IV,
started on him and put a pressure bandage over his back wound.
There was just no hope.
We were able to get them on an Evoque ship,
but he died.
Okay.
The scriptures say that there is no greater love than to lay down your life for
your friends.
This is what Calvin book night did in that fire filled jungle.
He sheltered the wounded.
He was treating with his own body,
his back to the enemy guns,
completely vulnerable.
Okay,
and here's how more it was.
Now 3:45 PM and except for the predicament of sergeant savage and the cutoff
platoon,
I was feeling a good deal better about the situation we had.
All of our men in massive firepower had been deployed.
A company reinforcements was on the way our to chopper lifeline landing zone was
secure.
Most of our wounded were either evacuated or awaiting evacuation and we were
holding tough.
I was determined to make one more attempt to rescue sergeant savage and all is
wounded and dead on the slope.
I ordered Alpha and Bravo company's to evacuate their casualties,
withdraw out of close contact with the enemy under covering fires.
It prepared to launch a coordinated attack supported by heavy preperatory
artillery fire to reach the cutoff platoon I was by the fate of those men and
the need to rescue them in chapter 10 is called fix bayonets,
which can give you an indication
back to the book.
Alpha and Bravo company's the first units to land had now been locked and
violent battle for more than two hours had suffered.
No small number of casualties,
especially among the sergeants and radio operators.
And it's shot up most of their ammunition.
That's another thing we got to remember.
The movies,
they never run out of ammunition.
No.
Right.
Unless it makes some theatrical point plot point.
Uh,
they also,
in the movies,
there's plenty of water.
Oh,
they're in the jungle.
They got plenty of water.
These guys don't have water out here.
No water,
no food.
And now they're running out of ammunition.
The two commanders,
Tony Noodle and John Heron needed time to evacuate their dead and wounded to
reorganize and regroup their diminished platoons and designate new leaders and
to replenish stocks of ammunitions of ammunition and grenades.
They would have 40 minutes to accomplish this.
Then heavy artillery fire wood lane down ahead of them as they kicked off.
One more attempt to break through the ring of enemy troops and rescue the
survivors of lieutenant hair.
Henry Herrick second platoon.
Meanwhile help was on the way back at Third Brigade headquarters in the tea
plantation.
The orders were going out,
our sister battalion,
the second Battalion Seventh Cav was informed that one of it's companies,
Bravo was being detached and sent to landing ex-ray landing zone x ray to
reinforce on arrival in x Ray Bravo company.
Second Battalion would come under my operational control for the duration of the
flight,
so there's a,
there's two battalions each.
Each battalion has a number of companies in them and they're going to take one
of the companies from the other battalion and let him let them come in as
reinforcements.
Captain Myron did.
Yuric Bravo
company troops won the toss hand down.
So
do you,
there was a bunch of different companies there and they were all doing various
things but uh,
Myron to Derek's company was actually,
I think they weren't,
they were standing guard and they were closest by and so they're the ones that
were going and it's,
it's,
it's probably a good thing because this guy captain did.
Derek is a complete bad ass as we'll see.
Bravo company.
Second Battalion had good solid professional non coms and it's true.
Could serve together for some for a long time.
It was a good rifle company.
I was happy to get it.
Captain to Derek was 27 years old,
a native born Ukrainian who'd come to the United States with his family in 1950
he was an ROTC graduate from Saint Peter's College and in Jersey City,
New Jersey.
And it was commissioned in July of 1960 he completed paratrooper and ranger
training and had served two tours in Germany and at Fort Benning to Derek was
married and the father of two children.
While our reinforcements,
we're saddling up my Alpha and company's,
we're about to launch their second attempt to break through Lieutenant Harris,
trap platoon,
John Heron,
and Tony and a doll had pulled their men back to the dry creek bed during the
wall so they would begin the attack from their platoon Sergeant Troy Miller
remembers the scene.
Our morale was very high after the first contact before we went off,
before we went after the carnival tune captain,
the doll got us together and said,
man,
we've got an American platoon caught off out there and we're going after them.
The replies word.
Yeah,
and let's go get them at Gary Owen and Gary Owen is the,
it's like the war cry of the,
of the cavalry.
Hmm.
So then there's a comes from an old song and it's,
it's just a historical thing and that's why you read the book.
She can find out about Gary Own.
It's their marching song.
Okay.
Back to the book.
Captain Tony Nudel Alpha company was the first man out of the creek bed leading
first platoon in the assault.
He recalls.
We moved about 50 yards when we ran into the enemy force,
which had come down the mountain.
I presume they were preparing to launch their attack about the time we launched
ours.
The fighting quickly became very vicious at close range.
We took many casualties.
Lieutenant Wayne Johnson,
the first platoon leader was hit at least three other squad leaders were also
hit.
Two of them killed one while going forward in an attempt to rescue one of his
soldiers against direct orders.
Okay.
Against direct orders going out to get my buddy.
Yeah.
Tony Nidal had ordered his men to fix bayonets for the attack bill back firing a
burst from his m 60 machine gun to his right front was transfixed by what he saw
just forward a tall thin sergeant bayoneting of north Vietnamese in the chest.
It was just like practice against the straw dummies.
Forward thrust,
pull out,
move on.
One,
two,
three.
Captain Tony to Dahl had four men in his command group as he charged into the
brush to radio operators,
Sergeant Jack Gal and a 25 year old native New Yorker and specialists Spec for
John Clark.
Of Michigan plus the company's artillery.
Forward Observer,
Lieutenant Timothy M.
Blake 24 from Charleston West Virginia,
and Blake's recon Sergeant Sergeant Floyd l Reed Jr 27 years old of Hef,
Arkansas.
As they moved up,
muddle had the radio handset to his year,
a burst of enemy machine gun fire swept across the group.
Sergeant Gal was hit and dropped without a sound.
Nadar
okay.
Kept moving until the long black cord pulled back on him.
He was looking around to see what was wrong.
The same burst that killed Sergeant Gail.
It also killed Lieutenant Blake and suck and struck Sergeant Reid who died
shortly thereafter.
Sergeant Sam Holman,
native,
uh,
Sergeant Sam Home Holman Junior,
a native of Pennsylvania,
a native Pennsylvania.
Nope.
Beside is mortally wounded.
Buddy Jack Gal and heard him.
Gasp.
Tell my wife I love her.
Tony to Dahl had no time to mourn.
Jack.
Now Jack Gal,
a man he greatly respected too many other lives were in his hands
on the right flank
of the bravo line.
Lieutenant deal was now rolling around on the ground,
desperately trying to dodge a valley of machine guns.
Slugs,
cutting through the grass all around him.
Suddenly 25 yards away deal,
saw an American get up and charge forward while everyone around him was flat on
his belly says deal.
I saw him throw a grenade behind an ant hill and mps weapon into it.
Then he fell to his knees.
I said to myself,
please get up.
Don't be hurt.
I didn't know who it was.
I couldn't make out the form.
There was so much battlefield Hayes dust and smoke.
It was Lieutenant Joe Marm.
He'd spotted an enemy machine gun dug into a big termite hill.
It was chewing up both Bravo company tunes.
After failing to knock it out with a law rocket and a grenade and a thrown
grenade,
he decided to deal with it directly.
He charged through the fire,
tossed a hand grenade behind the hill and then cleaned up the survivors with his
m 16 rifle.
Okay.
The following day we tend to Al [inaudible] found him dead,
north Vietnamese officer and 11 enemy soldiers sprawled behind that termite
mound
says deal.
Joe Marm saved my life and the lives of many others.
Lieutenant Mom's staggered backwards position with a bullet wound to his jaw and
neck.
He joined a growing stream of walking wounded flowing back toward the battalion
aid station.
Sergeant Keaton treated mom's a wound and one of Bruce Kahn Dells.
Krandell's qes evacuated him to the rear within days.
Lieutenant Joe Martin was recuperating at Valley Forge Army hospital near his
home in Pennsylvania in December of 1966 Joe Marr and report it to the Pentagon
where the secretary of the army acting on behalf of president Lyndon Johnson
presented him with the metal of honor,
the nation's highest award for valor.
Joe,
my arms heroic action unfortunately failed to open the door to the cut off
platoon.
Okay.
Bravo company.
He progressed only about 75 yards Alpha company a bit further all through of
noodles.
Platoon leaders.
We're now either dead or wounded as were many of his non coms.
Worst yet.
Alpha Company's first platoon had out ahead of the two other and was heavily
engaged with perhaps a hundred enemy.
Okay.
Some of the north,
some of the Alpha troopers bypass the enemy and dense brush and those north
Vietnamese.
It opened up on them.
Yeah.
Not only were we unable to punch through the rescue Herricks platoon,
we were now in danger of having another platoon caught off.
And again,
I apologize.
It's one of the things I should have talked about was the way this terrain is
set up,
it's a,
there's a lot of grass,
like I would say waist high grass,
maybe a little bit taller than waist high.
And it's,
if you take cover,
you can't say anything because you're in grass.
If you stand up and you get shot.
So it's,
it's a terrible a catch 22 do you stand up so you can see what's happening and
see where people are going and see where the enemy's maneuvering and you might
get shot or do you lay down where you take cover?
Do you have a better chance of not getting shot but you can't see anything?
Captain did.
Derek ran up to me and shouted,
Garryowen sir,
now this is,
this is awesome.
So Kevin did.
Eric is the guy that's coming into,
he's from to seven.
He's coming in as reinforcements and like I said,
Gary owners like their war cry.
Yeah.
So here we go.
Captain did.
Derek ran up to me and shadow.
So this is how more talk and he's all in this embroiled warzone been taken so
many casualties and here's what,
how Morris's captain did Yurik random to me and shouted,
Gary Owen,
sir,
Captain Derek and Pr and Bravo Company,
Second Battalion Seventh Cavalry,
120 men,
strong reporting for duty.
His eyes sparkled with excitement.
And the challenge of the situation I told the director to assemble as men in a
competency is 30 yards northwest of the command post to act as a bazaar
battalion reserved for the time being.
It's awesome.
Colombian report.
Gary,
Gary Allen,
sir.
Uh,
okay.
Captain did all says the fight continued for another 20 or 30 minutes with
neither side making headway.
It was getting dark and casualties mounted and I decided we are not going to be
able to break through.
I called Colonel Moore and ask for permission to pull back.
And here's what Colonel Morris says with Knight approaching,
there was no real choice.
I did not want to get into the hours of darkest with my battalion,
fragmented with a companies and capable of mutual support and subject to defeat
in detail.
Yeah.
Word came over the radio and this and so now this is a specialist Galen Bung Him
who's out there with the loss platoon back to the book of Ward came over the
radio that we would have to hang on till morning.
I could not believe what I heard.
I fought.
There was no way we'd be able to do that.
Others thought the same thing.
Clark [inaudible] asking me do you think will make it?
I didn't know,
but I said,
we have to pray and pray hard.
Who's a big question mark?
In all of our minds?
We had to keep our cool and bear down and now a year from Hell Morrigan I now
considered the toll.
This days,
fighting had taken,
donated to dolls.
Alpha company had lost three officers and 31 enlisted enlisted men,
killed or wounded and now reported effective strength of two officers in
[inaudible] 84 enlisted John Herons.
Bravo company had lost one officer and 46 enlisted men killed or wounded and was
down to four officers and 68 and listed men with one platoon Herricks trapped
outside the perimeter.
Okay.
For almost eight hours.
I had been involved in the minute to minute direction of the battle.
Now I wanted to personally walk the perimeter and check the preparations for
what promise to be a tough night and another tough day tomorrow just before dark
sergeant major Plumley and I broke away from the command post and set out to
check the perimeter,
talking with the troopers and getting for a feel for the situation on the
ground.
What concerned me the most was the morale of the men,
how well the companies were tied in there,
defensive fire plans and the situation with ammunition and water supplies.
Okay.
Morale among the men was high,
although there was understandable grief over the friends.
We had lost the men and I talked,
the man I talked with realize that we were facing a fierce determined enemy,
but he failed to break through our lines.
They knew the fight wasn't over.
I heard weary soldier saying things like,
we'll get him Sir and they won't get through us,
or they're fighting.
Spirit had not dimmed and they made me proud and humble.
Okay.
In every one of my companies that had landed in this place this morning,
there were 15 to 20 soldiers who had less than two weeks left to go in the army.
Some of those men now lay dead wrapped in ponchos near my command post.
The rest of them were out on that perimeter,
standing shoulder to shoulder with their buddies,
ready to continue the fight.
37 miles to the northeast.
Bruce Crandall and big Ed Freeman friendly,
shutdown their Hueys at alarm at a huge helicopter pad nicknamed the Turkey farm
outside the wire at Camp Holloway.
They had been flying nonstop since 6:00 AM it was after 10:00 PM would Crandall
shutdown and tried to get out of the aircraft.
That is when the day's activities caught up with me.
My legs gave out.
As I stepped on the skid and I fell to the ground for the next few minutes,
I vomited.
I was very embarrassed and it took some time to regain my composure.
Someone slipped me a bottle of cognac into my hand and I took a big slug.
It was a waste of good booze.
It came up as fast as it went down.
I quit shaking and made it to the operations.
Tend to recap the day and plan the next.
The aviation unit had quite a day.
We had not suffered a single fatality and we had not left the mission undone
when our infantry brothers called,
we hauled.
Okay.
The standard for combat assaults with helicopters had been set on this day.
I wondered about tomorrow.
Would it be worse?
I wasn't sure I could handle another day like today.
Then again,
I thought about the troops in x Ray.
Okay.
And the choice was not mine to make.
Here's how I'm more talking about the wound did back to the book,
all of the wounded,
all of our wounded phone out of x ray by Crandall's Hueys ended up at Charlie
company 15th Medical Battalion,
First Cavalry Division,
which was temporarily set up intensive Camp Holloway.
Okay.
The executive officer of Charlie Med was Captain George H [inaudible] 28 from
Saint Louis,
Missouri.
Charlie meds,
five surgeons tried to stabilize the soldiers coming off the helicopters.
The treatment we provided says Carolyn was designed to keep the blood flowing
through the patient system until he could be gotten to a hospital which had the
personnel and equipment to perform definitive surgery.
Okay.
Charlie meds.
Doctors tied off perforate the blood vessels to stop the hemorrhaging and then
pumped in whole blood.
Okay.
Kelly recalls that many of the casualties were rapidly bleeding to death,
so it was a race against time to get blood into the soldier faster than he was
losing it even while the surgeons we're trying to tie off bleeders.
Okay.
We threw caution to the wind and gave a patient for cut downs,
which is an intravenous tube tied into blood vessels with four Corman squeezing
the blood bags as hard as they could.
Okay.
It was not unusual for the patient to shiver and quake and loose body
temperature from the rapid transfusion of so much cold blood.
Both.
The alternative was to let them die
so they're giving blood directly into the veins and they've got Corman standing
there squeezing the bags of blood to try and keep people alive.
Back on Lz,
here's sergeant John Steadily and talking.
They probed us all night long.
We had a few men wounded.
I'd never been in a situation like that.
When they would come at us,
they would come screaming and we could hear bugles.
Okay.
As darkness fell,
savage was on the radio with Lieutenant Bill Riddle,
herons,
artillery,
forward absorb,
observer walking,
the high explosive barrages all around the cutoff platoon.
All of us were lifted off the ground by the impact and covered with dirt and
branches,
Bung them,
recalls.
Savage told them on the radio.
That was right where we want them.
We hollered that it was too close,
but I looked back where those first rounds hit and saw three men running towards
us.
We opened up,
they must've been crawling up on our position.
When that artillery came in,
they would sneak in his closest 10 yards or less and many times just stand up to
laugh at us.
We would mow them down.
It begins to work on your mind.
What are they laughing at?
I couldn't believe it.
The North Vietnamese launched three separate attacks to keep the pressure on the
trapped second platoon during that long night.
Each time sending about 50 men against the Americans and each time being beaten
back by artillery and rifle.
Fire savage had seven men on hurt and 13 wounded nine others were dead.
Some of the loss platoons wounded,
continue to fight,
including Sergeant Reuben Thompson who had been shot through the chest.
A platoon later heard still another large enemy force moving down the northern
trail toward x-ray and again brought artillery fire down on them.
This was followed by a flurry of hand grenades back and forth at about 4:30 AM
within an hour.
The first light in the eastern sky revealed dozens of khaki clad enemy dead,
scattered all around the little knoll,
the trap platoon,
and survived the longest night any of them would ever know.
Okay?
They checked their ammunition and prepared to receive a dawn attack and here's
one of the platoon sergeants talking
platoon sergeant Robert Jemison Jemison.
At first light.
We sent out a patrol staff Sergeant Sidney Cohen,
Spec for Arthur l Bronson,
and three other men were picked to go,
says Jemison.
They saved us from being surprised.
They spotted the enemy on their way back into an attack position.
They came running back with Bronson screaming their common sarge.
A lot of them get ready.
I told him machine gunners to hold their fire until they were close.
Pfc Willy,
God Bolt 24 of Jacksonville,
Florida was hit while firing from his position.
20 yards to sergeant jemisons.
Right.
Jemison remembers gall bolt hollering.
Somebody helped me.
I yet,
I'll go get him.
Lieutenant Joe.
Hey
Jake.
Jake,
we want to go to the Joe Jagan.
George Hagen,
Pfc Willie f God bolt.
24 of Jacksonville,
Florida was hit while firing from his position,
20 yards to sergeant jemisons.
Right.
Jemison remembers God bolt was hollering.
Somebody helped me.
I yelled,
I'll go get him.
Lieutenant George Hagen yelled back.
No,
I will.
Okay.
George Jagan moved out of his position in the Foxhole,
the help God bolt and was shot.
This was 10 minutes or so from the time the firing first broke out,
struck in the back of the head.
Lieutenant John Lance,
Jack Joe Jagan was killed instantly.
Okay.
The man he was trying to save Pfc God bolt died of his wounds shortly afterward.
The enemy was now close to within 75 yards of Edward's line.
They were firing furiously,
some crouch low and at times crawling on their hands and knees.
Others no taller than the elephant grass they were passing through,
came on,
standing up and shooting.
They advanced screaming at each other and Edwards men leaders were blowing
whistles and using hand and arm signals,
a few or even carrying 82 millimeter mortar tubes and base plates.
This was clearly a no hit and run a fare.
They'd come to stay
and here's Joe Stetler and talking or Sergeant John,
sorry,
John Statler.
Here's John's and talking.
It seemed like half of Italian hit us all at once.
He hit us head long and he had a strong,
I thought we were going to be overrun when Charlie hit us.
He had this strange grazing fire.
He shot right at ground level trying to cut off your legs,
or if you weren't deep enough in your Foxhole,
he shot your head off.
When he started firing at us,
it came like torrents of rain.
You just couldn't get your head long up long enough to shoot back.
You just stuck up your weapon,
pulled the trigger and empty the magazine.
Lieutenant Charlie Hastings,
our forward air controller had already swung into action sensing disaster.
Hastings made an immediate instinctive decision.
I use the code word broken Arrow,
which meant the American unit on the incontact was in danger of being overrun
and we received all available aircraft in south Vietnam for close air support.
We had aircraft stacked at a thousand foot intervals from 7,000 feet to 35,000
feet each waiting to receive a target and deliver their ordinance.
And here's how more by now,
I was convinced that the enemy was making a primary effort to overrun us from
the South and southeast,
and I alerted the reserve platoon for probable commitment into Charlie or Delta
company sectors.
The noise of the battle was unbelievable.
Never before or since in two wars have I heard anything equal to.
Okay,
and here's specialist Arthur Vieira.
The gunfire was very loud.
We were getting overrun on the right side.
Lieutenant Kroger came out into the open in all this.
I thought that was pretty good.
He yelled at me,
I got up to hear him.
He hollered at me to help cover the left sector.
I ran over to him and by the time I got there he was dead.
He had lasted a half an hour.
I knelt beside him,
took off his deck dog tags and put them in my shirt pocket and went back to
firing my m 79 and got shot right in the elbow.
My m 79 went flying and I was knocked over and fell backward over the lieutenant
Vieira now grabbed his 45 pistol and began firing at lefthanded and he says,
then I got hit in the neck and the bullet went right through.
I couldn't talk or make a sound.
I got up and tried to take charge and we shot it with a third round.
That one blew up my right leg and put me down.
It went in my leg above the ankle,
traveled up,
came back out,
then went into my groin and ended up in my back close to my spine
just then to stick.
Grenade blew up right over me and tore up both of my legs.
I reached down with my left hand and touched the grenade fragments on my left
leg and it felt like I touched a red hot poker.
My hands just sizzled.
Okay.
Unbelievable attack and I think that screwed description right there really
spells out how intense this was.
Obviously when you got chrome more saying that this is the loudest thing he's
ever heard and two wars.
That
also confirms what we're dealing with here.
Back to the book at 7:45 AM the enemy struck at the left flank of Tony and
dolls,
Alpha Company at the critical elbow where Alpha and Charlie companies were tied
in.
We are now under attack from three directions.
Grazing fire from rifles and machine guns,
shredded the elephant grass and swept over the battalion.
Command post an aid station leaves Barkan small branches,
branches fluttered down on us.
Several troopers were wounded in the same command post and at least one was
killed.
My radio operator Spec for Robert Plm,
23 years old,
had a spectacle of a speckled [inaudible] from Madawaska.
Maine was hit and slumped over in a sprawl unmoving and seemingly dead.
I kept the handset to my ear
and here's Joe Galloway,
the reporter.
The incoming fire was only a couple of feet off the ground and I was down as
flat as I could get when I felt the toe of a combat boot and my ribs.
I turned my head sideways and looked up there.
Standing tall was sergeant major.
Bazell Plumley Plumley lean down and shouted over the noise of the guns.
You can't take no pictures laying down there on the ground.
Sonny,
he was calm,
fearless and grinning.
I thought he's right.
We're all going to die anyways so I might as well take mine standing up.
I got up and began taking a few photographs.
Plumley moved over to the aid station,
pulled out as 45 chambered a round and informed Doctor Carrera and his medics.
Gentlemen prepare to defend yourselves,
so pull,
only thought
they're getting over on to,
or at least going to get close.
You're in the aid station that's in the center of this whole perimeter and he's
pulling out his 45 and st prepared to defend yourselves.
You can't make that up.
Specialists,
Willard F parish,
24 years old and a native of Bristow.
Oklahoma was an assistant squad leader of one of Charlie company's 81 millimeter
mortar squats.
Paris was one of the mortar men who had been outfitted with a spare machine,
guns and rifles collected from our casualties and put on the Delta Company.
Perimeter parish recalls when we were hit.
I remember all the tracer rounds and I wondered how even an aunt could get
through that.
Back to our right.
We started hearing the guys hollering,
they're coming around,
they're coming around.
I was in a foxhole with a guy from Chicago,
j PFC James Eat Coleman,
and he had an m 16 I had my 45 and his 45 and I had an [inaudible] machine gun.
We were set up facing out into the tall grass.
I was looking out front and I could see some of the grass going down like
someone was crawling in it.
I hollered,
who's out there?
Nobody answered and I hollered again,
no answer.
I turned,
I turned to Coleman,
burn his ass.
Coleman said,
my rifles jammed.
I looked at him and him at me.
Then I look to the front and they were growing out of the weeds.
I just remember getting that machine gun from there on out and the training
takes over and you put your mind somewhere else because I really don't remember
what specifically I did.
I was totally unaware of the time,
the conditions on that m 60 machine gun according to the extracts from his
silver star citation specialists,
Paris,
Paris delivered lethal fire on wave after wave of the enemy until he ran out of
ammunition.
Then standing up under fire with a 45 pistol in each hand.
Parish fired clip after clip into the enemy who were 20 yards out and he stopped
their attack.
Says parish.
I feel like I didn't do any more than anybody else did up there.
I remember a lot of noise,
a lot of yelling and then all at once it was quiet.
The silence out in front of Willard parish was that of this cemetery more than a
hundred dead north Vietnamese were later found where they had fallen in a semi
circle around his foxhole.
45 in each hand.
That's,
that's crazy actually.
I mean you,
yeah,
he's,
he's going through a whole nother level because you can't reload,
you know,
you can't reload your pistol.
So maybe he,
maybe he would stand up fire.
Both just dump will mag and each around and each to pistol,
get back down,
reload them both.
But then he got up there.
Well,
that's after he used all of his 60 Emma,
George Fox 25 and Nathaniel bird 22 were slumped across their silent and 60
machine gun surrounded by heaps of empty shell casings in empty ammunition cans.
They had died together shoulder to shoulder sergeant Jemison pays them the
ultimate compliment of a professional soldier.
Bird and Fox did a great job.
They kept firing that gun and didn't leave it.
They stayed on it to the end.
So all this close air is coming in this whole time,
artillery is coming in the whole time and all of a sudden they get a situation
where they start,
they see aircraft coming overhead with jets coming overhead,
low pass and they're,
they're heading towards them and they dropped some napalm.
So here's how more I yelled at the top of my lungs to Charlie Hastings,
the air force FAC call that son of a bitch off column off Joe Galloway Heard
Hasting screaming in the radio,
pull up,
Matt Dillon says,
I can still see the canisters tumbling toward us.
I remember thinking,
turn your eyes away so you won't be blinded.
I put my face into a reporter shoulder to hide my eyes.
That was Joe Galloways.
I could hear good time.
Charlie Hastings shouting into his radio,
pull up the second jet,
did the napalm from the first,
hit some people and caught some ammo on fire.
Sergeant Major Plumley jumped out to put the fire,
put out the fire around the ammunition.
I ran out into the Lz to put an air panel out.
Yeah,
Sergeant Nye says,
two of my people,
Pfc Jimmy d Nakiyama and specialists five James Clark,
we're on the other side of me.
Several yards away.
Somebody was hollering and Co.
Colonel Moore was standing up there hollering about something about a wing man,
and I looked up,
there were two planes coming and one of them had already dropped this napalm and
everything seemed to go in slow motion.
Everything was on fire.
Nakiyama was all black and Clark was burned and bleeding
and here's Joe Galloway.
Before I'd walked over and talked to the engineer guys and their little Fox.
Now those same men were dancing in the fire.
Their hair burned off in an instant.
Their clothes were incinerated.
One was a massive blisters.
The other not quite so bad,
but he had breathed fire into his lungs.
When the flames died down,
we all ran out into the burning grass.
Somebody yelled at me to grab the feet of one of the charge soldiers.
Okay.
When I got him,
the boots crumbled and the flesh came off and I could feel bare bones of his
ankles and the palms of my hands.
We carried him to the aide station.
Okay.
I can still hear their screams
SPEC for Thomas Ybor.
Lyle,
a medical man from Bravo Company,
second battalion,
rushed out into the clearing with his kit bag to help of napalm victims.
Birla was shot in the head and died within minutes in lieutenant rest score,
Lowe's arms,
an Oklahoma man.
Berlin had turned 23 years old just four days before he was killed
back in the command post.
Our Air Force Fac Charlie Hastings was stunned by all the consequences of the
misplaced air strike.
Hastings recalls after the napalm strike,
Colonel More looked at me and said something that I never forgot.
Don't worry about that one,
Charlie.
Just keep them coming.
Okay.
Yeah.
Debbie,
he knows what he's got to do.
He's got a things that just killed some of his own men,
wounded some of his own men by fire and he's freaking out.
Probably doesn't want to call any more bombs on,
and how more realizes that that's what's keeping him alive.
Don't worry about that one.
Just keep them coming.
Charlie company,
First Battalion,
Seventh Cavalry,
he'd be be gone.
It's day with five officers in 106 men by noon.
It had no officers left and only 49 men on hurt.
A total of 42 officers and men had been killed and 20 more wounded than two and
a half hours of vicious hand to hand fighting
the bodies of hundreds of slain Vietnamese north Vietnamese littered the bloody
battleground
Spec for pat Selleck.
24 and a native of Mount Kisco.
New York says,
I remember one guy had a small American flag on the back of his pack.
When I saw that I felt very proud.
That's something that always stuck with me.
This American flag was put on top of a blown up tree,
just like,
Ooh,
Jima.
Okay.
Another battle we had for the United States,
that little flag flew over landing zone x ray for the rest of the fight,
raising all our spirits
and now there's a lull in the fighting
and here we go back to the book.
During this little,
the saddest,
most painful and hardest duty to endure what's collecting are dead and loading
them on board the helicopters.
Okay.
There were so many that the brigade ordered the big choppers,
the ch 47 chinooks.
Okay.
One such helicopter lifted out all 42 of the dead from Charlie Company.
They came in together,
died together and now left together,
wrapped in their green rubber.
Ponchos SPEC for Vincent Cantu says we were picking up our dead and placing them
in the choppers.
Yeah,
some of these guys I had known for two years,
you'd I could recognize them only by their name tags.
Their faces were blown off.
It was hard not to get sick.
We would look at each other and without saying a word,
just continue putting our dead on the choppers.
Now.
The colonel that's in charge of the both,
both battalions,
he makes a visit and here we go.
Mid morning before Tali arrived,
Colonel Tim Brown flew in for a visit.
Plumley recalls Lieutenant Colonel Moore saluted Brown and said,
I told you not to come in here.
It's not safe.
Brown picked up his right collar lapel and waggled his full colonels eagle at
Moore and said,
sorry about that.
Dylan and I gave him a situation report.
Brown asked whether he should stay in X.
Ray established a small brigade command post and run the show.
We we recommended against that.
I knew the area and Bob Tully and I got along just fine.
Brown,
a Geek agreed.
Lieutenant Dick Merchant says Colonel Brown had trust and confidence in his
commanders.
I'm aware that some felt he should have landed an x ray and established a
command post.
I've never accepted that.
The First Battalion Seventh Cavalry was probably the finest battalion in
Vietnam.
Well-Trained,
superbly led with outstanding officers.
An NCO is throughout the unit.
Brown would have been out of place in X-ray.
Besides,
there was no room for a brigade CP.
I recall it being rather crowded behind that ant hill.
So the reason I put that in there,
because here's the,
the guy that's,
you know how Morris boss comes in to to check on the scene and some people say,
oh he should have stayed there because it was a bad fight.
And he in this,
um,
Dick Merchants said no.
Like he shouldn't have stayed there.
He,
he did the right thing.
He came,
visited and left.
And by the way,
you want to set up a brigade command posts,
you need to find your own little ant hill.
Cause this one's on,
this one's,
you know,
all the size of a,
yeah,
it's full and it's the size of a car.
We got dead and wounded everywhere.
And uh,
so,
but it's,
it's the important point there from my perspective is,
you know,
the key thing is that he had trust and confidence in his officers.
He didn't need to go out there and micromanage them.
And I'm not saying you can never do that.
I've definitely not say that's the dichotomy of leadership.
You know,
sometimes you might look out there and say there's something going on,
I need to get out there and you'd get in the weeds and get this brown problem
handled.
I need to come out there and support in this particular case probably wouldn't
have been a good idea how more had it under control at this point.
That's why they're landing.
Uh,
uh,
chinuch which is a c 47 giant helicopter,
much bigger than a Huey needs.
You know,
it's slower and at least on OnApproach it's slower.
Hmm.
So yeah,
there's a time to get out there and micromanage and there's a time when you let
your teams lead.
Okay.
Going back to the book in Myron [inaudible] and Lieutenant Rick Ross Scola.
So these are the two guys that came from the second battalion seventh Cav and he
just talks about him a little bit and I think it's worse it worth mentioning.
Rick risk.
Scola and Myron did Yurik Bravo company,
second battalion had to foreign born officers whose accents and Gung Ho
attitudes lent a Tacho Foreign Legion flair,
the Ukrainian to Duroc and the Englishman risk score.
La was were destined over the next 72 hours to become battlefield legends in the
seventh Cav as much for their style as they're fearless leadership under fire.
And
yeah,
it's,
you can see what these leaders do and you do get to see it.
But here's when,
when to Derek,
remember he touched down and he was told,
hey,
go,
go set up security.
And here we go.
Uh,
Myron to Derek and his soldiers had not yet been sorely tested,
but they soon would be during that wall to direct made certain that fields of
fire and observation were cleared out to beyond 200 yards at good fighting
positions were dug.
That machine guns were placed in positions that a shirt that assured flanking
interlocking fire,
that trip flares and anti intrusion devices were installed as far as 300 yards
out,
that every man was locked down,
loaded down with ammunition to that ammo.
Ammo resupply points were designated that all radios were checked and double
checked.
Then did Yurik worked very carefully with his artillery forward observer,
registering,
preplanned fires across the front.
The officer,
the officer,
Lieutenant William Lund had four batteries,
24 Howard's there's registered and adjusted on call.
So that's,
you ever wonder what,
uh,
what a military leader does?
That's what he does right there.
Dials everything in.
Hmm.
And here he's talking about,
uh,
so one of the Dereks platoon leaders was Rick Rusk Orla.
And here's what he says about Rick.
Risk score low Rick,
or scroll up.
First platoon leader was six months out of ocs at the infantry school at Fort
Benning,
but he had arrived there with a wealth of good training rd and in under his belt
he had served in the British army in Cyprus and with the colonial police in
Rhodesia.
And he knew what soldiering was all about,
what he did to prepare his position and his men speaks for his professionalism.
So here's what [inaudible] did.
[inaudible] walked the terrain and tried to see it from the enemy's point of
view.
That's critical.
What's the enemy thinking?
Scrub brush,
elephant grant,
grass and hills and some ground cover stretched to the front.
The ground was not as flat as it first appeared,
but had seams and thick ruck stretching off to the south with a slight incline
away from his positions.
The hasty prone shelters dug by Charlie company.
First Battalion had been dug after nightfall under enemy pressure risk score.
Allah moved his men back 50 yards,
which not only shorten the sector but meant the enemy would now have to leave
the trees and cross 40 yards of mostly open area to reach Bravo Company
foxholes.
Risk score of the recalls because of our short and lines,
I decreased the number of foxholes.
Three man holes were constructed.
The [inaudible] machine guns were set on principle directions of fire from which
they could switch to final protective grazing fire interlocking with each other
and with the machine guns on our flanks.
Foxholes and pair of pets were built in detailed.
I tested the holes.
Some were so deep the occupants could not even see the pen over the parapet.
In these cases,
firing steps were built back up two hours before dusk.
Sergeant e s Bach a two seven and Sergeant Thompson organized a booby trap
detail carefully they rigged grenades and trip flares far out on the main
avenues of approach.
Claimer mines,
Claymore mines would have ice the cake,
but somewhere they had been lost a screw up,
but I felt we were ready to tangle with the best of the North Vietnamese and
again,
these guys are,
luckily there's a lull and they have all the time to prepare this and get it all
set up and that's a big difference from what happened when these guys hit the Lz
and they didn't have any of this stuff.
They didn't have any of the terrain figured out.
They'd have a chance to set it into their personnel up.
And these guys are taking advantage of that tactical situation to get up there
and make things right.
And you know,
both those guys,
you can see that's what a leader does.
That's what a leader does.
They make sure things are right,
they make sure you're ready to win and you can do that.
And that applies to every,
every leader in every position,
in every industry,
in every team in the world that the leader is stepping up and making sure we are
going to be prepared to win.
And by the way,
this Rick risk score law,
and this is a little bit of a side note,
he ended up working for Morgan Stanley as the head of security for Morgan
Stanley and they worked at the twin towers in New York City.
That's where Morgan Stanley was.
And he felt like they needed to do drills like they needed to prepare and that
like,
well,
what happened if the towers came under attack and they ran a bunch of drills and
when September 11th came day,
ran those drills and got everyone evacuated.
And
okay,
Rick Risk Score.
La was last seen on the 10th floor,
going back up into the building to do a final check and make sure that everyone
was out to and the tower collapsed at 9:59 AM and he saved a lot of lives that
day.
Not only through his actions on the day of but through his actions in preparing.
Now
the Vietnamese calm,
the north Vietnamese come and
they bring it.
Here we go.
The first rush by at least 300 north Vietnamese was beating off in less than 10
minutes by small arms machine guns and artillery fire from the alert and
well-prepared.
Bravo company.
Second Battalion troops at 4:31 AM 20 minutes later they came back.
Did your ex said the intensity of their attack increased and I was under the
under assault aimed at my three left platoon sectors.
Screams,
shouts and whistles split the night as Nva swept down the mountain straight into
the smoke clouded killing ground.
Now all the mortars of my battalion and Talise were turned loose.
Adding there 81 millimeter high explosive shells to the general mayhem rifleman.
John Martin who is into Derek's lines,
says we kept pouring rifle and machine gun fire and artillery on them and they
broke and ran.
I don't think we had any casualties,
but they were catching hell.
So,
so now it's totally different story.
These guys are dug in.
They have all their artillery dialed in,
they've got their fields of fire set up and the tax calm,
well organized sacks with 300 people there.
Did you,
can't they?
They,
they,
they don't make it happen.
The Vietnamese don't make it happen.
Yeah.
Okay.
Back to the book.
Over on the perimeter,
a scoreless men fought on our [inaudible] switch to direct fire fire delivered
to a visible target and lob rounds out between 75 and 100 yards.
Still,
the shadowy clumps moved closer.
Rpgs and machine guns crackled as they blasted us from the dark line of ground
cover across open fields.
They came in a ragged line.
The first groups caught down after a few yards,
a few surge right on sliding down behind their dead comrades for cover and
amazing highly disciplined enemy.
A trooper,
Kirsten pleaded in a high pitched voice.
God stopped the bastards.
So here they are,
they're attacking and when the,
when the north Vietnamese soldiers get hit,
they're,
their buddies are coming up behind them taking cover behind their bodies and
continuing to assault.
So this is an indicator,
you know,
like I said,
this was early in the ward since 1965 and you know,
we didn't know that that's determined enemy yet.
We didn't understand that yet.
And here we're seeing it for the first time.
This is what,
this is what,
uh,
this is how these guys are.
They are going to attack.
They're going to attack through whatever we put at.
Here's another situation.
Settle in.
This is a steadily been whispered orders to his squad telling men on either side
of him to hold their fire,
not to shoot until the enemy stepped out into that open space right in front.
Suddenly a flare into booby trap went off and they were there in the grass
shooting at us.
I took around just above the elbow,
nothing really just a stitch or two and a piece of tape.
After the flight,
nobody shot back.
Then they stepped into that open area.
The flares were burning,
they were lit up and it was easy.
We opened up and picked him off.
It was a light attack.
They then they hit us harder 30 minutes later blowing bugles blowing whistles.
We killed them all.
Then some white phosphorous came in about 15 front of in front of my whole and I
lost most of my web gear and my shirt had about eight burns on one arm.
John's stet.
Lynn sat there under the light of the flares and use the point of his band net
to quickly dig the still burning Willy Pete fragments out of his flesh.
So white phosphorous is a type of munition net that we use and it's,
it's white phosphorous in it,
hits and blows up and it's on fire.
It's a little pieces of burning hot metal
and he's picking it out of his arm
during the two and a half hours of the attack against a direct sector.
The rest of the x ray prone or had been quiet too quiet.
Dylan and I discussed the possibility of conducting a reconnaissance by fire to
check for presence of the enemy w elsewhere on the line,
we had plenty of ammunition and what the hell the enemy knew where we are.
Our lines were by now as well as I did.
We pass the word on the battalion net at precisely 6:55 AM every man on the
perimeter would fire his individual weapon and all machine guns for a full two
minutes on full automatic word was to shoot up trees,
ant hills,
bushes and high grass forward of the Ford of and above the American positions.
Gardeners would shoot anything that worried them by now.
We had learned to our sorrow that the enemy used the night to put snipers and
trees ready,
do damage at first light.
Now is the time to clean up out front.
At the state of time,
our perimeter or rob did in earsplitting uproar and immediately a force of 30 to
50 north Vietnamese rose from a cover 150 yards forward of Joe's [inaudible]
Alpha company.
Second Battalion Lines and began shooting back.
The mad minute of firing triggered their attack prematurely.
Artillery fire was instantly brought in on them and the attack was beaten off
when the shooting stopped.
One dead sniper dangled by his rope from a tree and Ford have to Derek's left
most position,
another drop dead out of a tree almost immediately forward of John Heroes.
John Herons,
Bravo Company,
First Battalion Command Post a third view north Vietnamese sniper was killed an
hour later when he tried to climb down for from history and run for it.
Sergeant steadily Steadman's arm speckled with white phosphorous burns began
hurting him.
Now I was sent back to the aid station where my arm was bandaged and I was
waiting to be medivaced out.
The more I sat there,
the more I realized I couldn't in good faith,
get on a chopper and fly out there and leave those guys behind.
So I took the sling off my arm and went back out.
Okay.
Somebody asked where you going?
I said,
back to my foxhole.
Nobody said anything else.
Yeah,
so obviously these guys now have gained some,
some good fire superiority.
The upper hand in the battle.
Okay.
Back to the book risk Orlin.
His men had been watching the air show appreciatively.
We gathered for the last sweep.
Suddenly a fighter bomber plowed down on us from above.
We buried our noses in the holes and express train screamed down and the
explosion shook the earth.
The bomb landed 30 yards from our holes.
We came up cursing in the dust and debris.
The call came to move out.
Every available trooper,
including Colonel Moore,
push the perimeter out.
This time it was no contest at all.
We killed 27 more enemy and crushed all resistance.
I looked over the field littered with enemy dead sprawled by ones and twos and
heaps across a torn,
gouged land,
blood body,
fragments,
torn uniforms,
shattered weapons littered the landscape.
It was a sobering site.
Those men are enemies,
had mothers too.
Okay.
But we had done what we had to do
aside from wanting to make certain that Derek and his men did a clean,
safe job.
I had one reason for joining the final assault personally.
Yeah,
this is,
this is Colonel Moore talking and then it goes to Rick [inaudible].
Rick Ross scroller watched Colonel Morin.
Our sector was rushing up.
The clumps of body's pulling them apart.
What the hell is the kernel doing up there?
Sargent Thompson asked,
I shook my head Beta.
We saw him coming back at the head of men carrying ponchos by 10:30 AM colonel
Moore had found what he was looking for.
Three dead American troops were no longer Michigan action.
Now,
there were on their way home to their loved ones.
By now,
late morning,
Tuesday,
November 16th the personality of landing zone x ray had changed what previously
had been a killing field,
had become something else.
We moved without impunity in places where movement had meant death on the hours
before,
except for our own and air.
There was nothing to be heard.
It was just too quiet too sudden and it made me uneasy.
Okay.
That old principle,
nothing was wrong except that nothing was wrong.
Where was the enemy headed?
Back to Cambodia,
still on the mountain preparing to attack again,
headed north to the I drank and it's precious water.
And again,
the old question,
where were the enemy?
12.7 millimeter heavy antiaircraft machine guns.
If the enemy commander brought those weapons to bear on us from the mountain
above Lz x Ray with three American battalions crowding the clearing would
present a beautiful target.
I told Dillon to step up the harassing artillery fire and to keep the airstrikes
coming in and the slopes above us.
I told him I wanted a picture perfect helicopter extraction covered by all the
firepower we could bring to bear.
So yeah,
tides have turned completely and in fact,
they've turned so completely that a Chinuch,
which is the big helicopter flies in with a bunch of photographers and
television crews and reporters and they surround
the surround Colonel Morin.
Here we go back to the book,
the other reporters now clustered around me.
I told them that this had been a bitterly contested battle,
that clearly we were up against a brave,
determined and very tough enemy in the north Vietnamese soldiers,
but that American firepower,
disciplined guts and will to win had carried the day at Lz x Ray.
Yeah,
brave American soldiers and the m 16 rifle,
one of victory here.
I said,
my voice choked in my eyes filled with tears.
As I told the reporters that many of my men who had been killed in this place,
we're only a matter of days away from completing their service in the army,
but they fought and died bravely.
Okay.
As I stood there,
I knew that the telegrams that would shatter the hearts and lives of scores of
American families were already being drafted.
Now came the body count and if you remember,
we've talked about this before.
Everyone was always,
they wanted to talk about the body count in Vietnam,
even at this early stage and he was thinking about that back to the book.
Now came the body count from the beginning of the fight.
I had known that higher headquarters would eventually want to know what damage
we had done to the enemy.
So after each major action in this battle hating it,
I asked my company commanders for their best estimates of enemy killed with the
battle raging back and forth over three days and two nights.
It was anything but orderly.
There was no referee to call time out for a body count.
We did the best we could to keep a realistic count of the enemy dead.
In the end it added up to 834 dead by body count with an additional 1,215
estimated killed and wounded by artillery air attacks and Ariel rocket attacks.
Okay.
On my own I cut the 834 figure back to 634 a personal allowance for the
confusion and fog of war and let the hundred 1,215 estimated stand
we captured in evacuated six enemy prisoners
on our side.
We had lost 79 Americans killed in action,
121 wounded
and none missing,
and
at this point they get extracted off the battlefield and including Colonel
Moore.
He's the last man to leave
from his battalion and here we go back to the book.
It was a short,
fast ride to landing zone Falcon,
just five and a half miles east of x-ray.
As we landed among the artillery pieces,
I saw 75 yards away,
a group of my troopers off in the Northwestern edge of the Lz.
Okay.
Dean breathless.
An NBC News correspondent was in Lz Falcon that afternoon.
He captured the scene in his 1967 book,
the face of South Vietnam.
And here's what [inaudible] wrote.
Yeah.
How Maura was the last man to come out of the battle.
It was the biggest battle he had ever fought.
He was a lieutenant colonel and he carried himself like a proud man.
Is Sergeant Major,
was at his side.
It would need a Shakespeare to describe what happened then,
but it was something that was love and manliness and pride.
Yeah,
it was the moment of the brave.
How more turned and went from group to group of his men and only a few bothered
to get up because there was no exclusivity.
Now,
no rank.
And how more did not want them to stand and salute.
He was saluting them.
He talked with them,
he thanked them,
he was not solemn and he did not bring too is greetings and salutations of a
political of a politician.
There was no poverty of spirit in his hand.
Shook,
shake,
and he shook every man's hand.
It was a union of men who had met and defeated the enemy.
Not Forever,
not in a victory that ended the war,
but it a victory over their uncertainty.
Okay.
When their hour had come,
they had done their job and it was this thought too that Al Moore,
how more had in his mind,
and he said that if they had one,
no one else has gratitude.
They had his
and I,
and I think
that these men,
all these men have,
are absolute
gratitude
for fighting,
for freedom,
for each other,
for fighting for us.
And,
and actually the,
the story doesn't end there
nor does the book
and we're going to save it for the next podcast,
but we're going to hear about the story of l z Albany,
which is a few miles to the north in still inside the eye.
Drang valley where second battalion of the seventh cav moved in and fought.
And
it's,
there's so much that I didn't cover in this,
in this what I just covered.
There's so much I didn't cover me,
didn't even cover the loss platoon.
Who does eventually get recovered?
Uh,
read the book.
I should have left that out.
Spoiler alert.
But sure,
there's so much in there.
There's so much,
so many lessons learned.
So much action,
so much good description and so many heroes in so much sacrifice.
I don't even think gratitude.
Okay.
I even did gratitudes enough.
I think we owe them more than just gratitude.
We owe them our best.
Yeah.
We owe them our lives,
our best lives every day.
Okay.
Every moment.
Remember this sacrifice
and what we owe them as we owe them to live our best lives.
Then I think that's all I've got for tonight.
So
Echo.
Um,
yeah,
yeah.
Well I decompress over here.
Maybe you can
give some input on how to support this podcast or support yourself if you want
to.
Sure.
Yeah.
If you want to.
So of course the first way is supporting your joints.
I always talk about supplements.
Jacqueline is supplements best kind.
Okay.
Jocko,
joint warfare and supercrew Krill oil.
Omega threes.
Very good for you.
If you want some of that,
get it@originmain.com.
Yeah,
right there on the front where you just click on labs.
It's right there.
Also,
there's some good,
uh,
gies,
but before that,
give a new product.
We do a new product,
a new class of product,
class of product.
I bring workout now you're all in England right now?
Yeah.
Buzzing on Irina.
So discipline,
it's a pre workout,
just saying that's a cool word.
Or that's the name of both.
Both.
So it's called discipline,
right?
So it's pre,
technically they call it a pre workup or we're calling it a preadmission.
Yeah.
Supplement.
Well preworkout would help you with your physical activity,
but the discipline has cognitive enhancers in it as well.
Because when you're on a mission you just don't need physical strength.
You need mental strength.
Yeah.
So this gives you both.
So if your mission is the workout,
boom,
there you go.
It's a pre workout.
Your mission is a s exam.
It's a pre exam.
Yes.
Supplement.
If your,
if your mission is a mission and what you're good to go.
There you go.
Boom.
Oh yeah,
get down.
Um,
I too can vouch for this because I'm on it too cause it should perform well to
you know,
display it's affects.
Um,
also Giza in rash guards at origin Maine,
all made in America.
The more I think about that,
the more of a big deal that is a real big deal.
Yeah.
Cause it's from the little like,
oh we say the cotton to the g,
the g or the,
you know,
the other stuff that this is a lot of cool stuff on there.
GIES rash guards,
even apparel all made in America or didn't mean I'll come to this spot to get
them.
If you want them.
I want them.
I like them.
It's funny,
like every once in a while I'll find myself just wearing all origin stuff.
Not on purpose too.
It's the kind of,
okay,
my favorite shorts even though they don't have them.
I know I'm wearing that.
It were every other day approximately.
And um,
you know,
you just find yourself in this stuff because it's so good.
That's my opinion.
Also for fitness gear,
cool fitness gear,
she want to,
even if you're just doing kettlebells,
icy,
get artistic kettlebells from on it on it.com/jocko that's where you get them.
It was all other creative workout stuff on their maces and cool jump ropes and
battle ropes and,
and whatnot.
Um,
pretty much anything.
If you're getting bored with the workout and you want to enhance it in some
creative way,
go there on a.com/jocko uh,
don't get addicted to the website because a lot of good information.
So it's kind of a catch 22 good.
You can get info on there.
A lot of good Info,
interesting info,
but he might spend a lot of time there.
So be careful also when you buy this book,
we were soldiers once and young by general.
Hal Moore and Jill Galloway.
No,
what I was thinking,
I have no idea what you're thinking.
So something tells me,
I'm about to hear though.
If you watch the movie,
a few good men
think Demi Moore.
Yes.
She plays,
uh,
like she plays a Jaguar lieutenant.
Yeah,
I seen the movie.
Her name,
the character name is Jo Ann Galloway,
but colored Jill.
So her name is Joe Galloway.
I noticed that anyway,
when you buy this book,
we were soldiers in there.
Is there some layers?
Those are interpreted.
The layers are not layers.
Walls are coincidences.
There's a big difference.
It's a fine line.
Charlie Beckwith that formed up Delta Force.
Sure.
Being in this book,
that's layers.
Layers.
Yeah.
I would,
I would confirm those layers for ferret layers for sure.
I don't know.
I still feel like joke is a layered somewhere negative.
I Dunno.
What if they negative no of this negative stories and they named the girl they
could have negative,
maybe,
maybe not.
And if they did,
they failed.
They failed.
Yeah.
Cause after it.
So we'll Juliet Galloway kind of got it.
No,
no,
not really.
Which she convinced
either way.
I still think slayers.
Either way.
When you,
um,
when you buy this,
when you buy this book,
we have it listed on our website along with all the books that Jocko reviews.
It's on the website,
Jocko,
podcast.com in the section open the top menu.
Click books from podcast.
Boom.
It's all there by episode.
Click through there.
Good way to support,
get from Amazon,
you know,
all that stuff.
And then,
you know,
continue to do more shopping if you want.
If you want,
just carry on.
Here you go.
Good way to support.
Also subscribed to the podcast,
iTunes,
Google play,
stitcher,
Spotify confirmed.
Some sent me the actual link or visual.
I saw it visually.
Visual confirmation,
Spotify,
boom.
And other podcasting,
providing platforms.
Just subscribed.
I know you have already,
but let's save some in the US.
Likely Unlikely.
A chance that you didn't subscribe.
Good subscribed,
good way to support.
If you want.
Also subscribe to Youtube.
If you like the visual,
the visual,
the video version of this podcast.
You want to see what y'all can looks like.
You don't see what I look like.
If you care about that sort of thing.
Boom.
Most people don't care what we look like.
No I don't.
I don't think
it makes sense that they don't care because it doesn't matter.
They just care about the content of your character.
Subscribe to Youtube.
That's the point.
If you do care about what we look like,
also does excerpts on there.
Good way to get little bits of lessons,
messages from Jocko shareable so you don't have to share the whole and a half
ish our podcast.
You can just share the,
the excerpts,
pass them on,
you know,
let someone else,
uh,
learn these lessons with you.
Also,
chuck was a store called Jocko store
named after him,
John Glassdoor,
door.com.
That is where you can get the cool shirts.
I think they're cool and I think it goes beyond just my opinion because people
have emailed me in and been like,
hey,
these are cool because I made sure they're not the low quality,
you know,
people and they started shirt brand or if they're printing shirt they're like,
hey,
let me get the cheap ones so I don't have to spend a lot of money,
play it safe,
all this stuff.
I didn't do that.
I got the good ones,
stuff that I would actually wear regardless of what's printed on like wearable,
they're wearable.
So I put it anyway.
That's how I know they're good.
I'm wearing one right now.
Yeah,
correct me to boom.
See I wouldn't wear it if I didn't want to wear it.
So anyway,
they're a very good,
that's where you can get the shirts.
There's women's stuff on there.
Uh,
also this rash guards in there for activities such as surfing,
Jujitsu,
warrior.
Could rash guard out there or he could rush card should be restarted.
There.
Should be on there.
Good.
I vowed to get them in,
in time to ship for Christmas.
So that would be like today.
So go on there and you know,
that's the,
my vow is that the right word vow.
I vow to do this.
That means you better succeed.
Yeah.
You know,
that's one of,
okay.
So anyway,
yeah,
some rash guards doesn't there for Jujitsu,
surfing and kind of cool activity,
cycling,
whatever,
anything you want.
Range of motion to be maintained.
100% and performance be increased by 19% I think it's up to 21% back from the
field.
Yeah.
I think I kind of average cause some people a little bit more,
you know,
so those people that they pushed the average up,
I think that's how it works.
Anyway.
Cool stuff on there.
Check it out.
I'm not saying get something,
but if you want something
then you get something and,
and it supports podcast.
Good way to support what he's on there as well.
Thicker ones.
They might be running lab,
might have to get some more.
It is winter,
I get it.
But they're the,
they're the uh,
the thicker ones.
Like how you said also psychological warfare,
what that is.
If you don't know.
I know we all know what it is already.
It's been number one and I two.
Well,
it might not be number one anymore.
That's a long story.
Anyway,
if you didn't know what it is,
the unlikely event that you didn't know what it is,
is what it is.
It's an album with tracks,
chocolate tracks.
Each track is designed
to help you through moments of weakness.
When you're on your path,
when you're on your warpath.
Haven't used that word yet.
Wait,
maybe I have.
I Dunno.
Nonetheless,
when you're on the path of discipline,
right,
you're on the program,
you're on your campaign against weakness.
You,
you hit little,
it's not just one smooth road and it's not a one straight road either and it's
riddled,
riddled
every day,
probably every minute.
Literally riddled with distractions.
Every once in a while you'll hit moments of weakness,
whether it's a speed bump,
distraction,
lack of energy,
boredom,
repetitiveness,
tediousness,
that's order.
That's what psychological warfare is for.
It's a little spot for those moments.
You don't want to wake up early every single day.
Ah,
we got the solution for that.
He listened to the little track Jocko,
pragmatically telling you,
I can get over that little moment of weakness.
Same thing with wanting to skip the workout for the day.
That was mine.
Not Anymore.
Check and yeah,
there's a bunch of them for all kinds of stuff.
Skipping on the Diet and it's a good one.
That's what psychological warfare is.
Very effective.
Percent effectiveness.
That's a bold statement and you can get Jocko white tea on Amazon,
which will make you deadlift 8,000 pounds factually confirmed,
confirmed.
Uh,
you can get some books on their way.
The warrior kid,
good Christmas gift.
It's also a good whatever gift.
So get all kid on the path,
get them on the path.
You've got so much great feedback on that.
Extreme ownership.
This is from leading at every level in combat,
in business and in life.
Extreme ownership.
Written meet by me and my brother Leif Babin.
Also from an individual perspective,
if you want to get yourself on the path,
there's no better gift than discipline.
The discipline equals freedom field manual.
Everyone that asks me for workouts,
that's where they are.
Everyone asks me what I eat.
That's where it is.
You haven't asked me how much I sleep.
So get that.
If you want the audio version,
the audio version is not on audible.
The audio version of discipline equals freedom field manual is on iTunes,
Amazon music,
Google play and all these other MP3 distributing platforms.
There's another monster,
the monster,
which is echelon front leadership conference.
There's two of them going to be only two of them in 2018 we don't have enough
room in the schedule to fit three uh,
one Washington DC or sorry,
this is actually not one.
It's number five.
So number five,
Washington DC,
May 17th and 18th and then number six,
San Francisco,
October 17th and 18th.
Come and get it.
You can register for those extreme ownership.com is,
are they going to be like bigger?
Like you'll have to have more people.
We have,
we have a little bit bigger capacity.
Yeah.
But we just,
we don't have time in the schedule anymore and we are going to do roll call for
law enforcement,
military firefighters.
We're gonna do that as well.
But we haven't locked the date on that one yet.
Also for leadership in addition to this podcast,
in addition to the books,
in addition to the muster,
we have a leadership in management consulting company and you could hire us to
me,
Leif Babin,
JP to know Dave Burke,
email info additional on Ashland front.com if you want us to come and speak at
an event,
don't call a speaker's bureau.
Don't call a speakers' agency.
Just go to ash.
Just go to echelon front.com yeah,
they'd been calling me.
Yeah,
don't do that.
That's what we do and if you have comments or questions or answers for us,
we can be found on the interwebs,
on Twitter,
on Instagram,
and on the baseball camp.
Echo is at Echo,
Charles and I am at Jocko Willink and thanks to those people,
those soldiers,
sailors,
airmen and marines that sign up
that sign up and volunteer to make the ultimate sacrifice.
Thank you all for protecting us and our freedoms and to police and law
enforcement.
Thanks for protecting us from crime and criminals and terrorists right here at
home to paramedics.
Thanks for coming to us in our time of need when we call and to the firefighters
right now out there on the line,
especially in our state right here of California,
cal fire.
Thanks for your service and your sacrifice and my condolences to those who have
fallen in recent days and weeks.
And our thoughts are with the families of the fallen and for everyone else
that's listening.
When you see what men can do when pushed beyond the limit of human capacity,
when you see that,
when you hear about it,
when you read about it.
Yeah.
Well then remember to push yourself,
push yourself every day,
every moment.
Get out there and get after it.
And so until next time,
this is echo n Jocko out.